Anbei bekommst du die Antwort Nachricht von dem Software Hersteller. Da
es sich ja hier um Werbung fuer den Hersteller handelt, habe ich
ausnahmsweise mal keine Skrupel die Nachricht zu posten.

Hi Pierre,

Here are the auction software options we have available that can help
you realize your objectives.  You will be getting an entire Website, not
just the backend auction software.

A Complete list of features can be found at:
http://esl.gffbkxnsljzmtnu.rlh/gmpavgizhbeuwbp

You can see our Auction Administrator demo at:
http://yurcazb55.tdozqksdagyhmhz.bvq/nugfw

You can see a demo of the the Option 1 auction software at:
http://rduayvp67.zrrjvhzgbnzpuzt.pdu

VISUAL AUCTION SERVER 3.0 -------------------------

Option 1 - Base package: The Do-It-Yourself Auction $2995.00 - This
option is comparable to other auction software packages seen on the
Internet (but more easy to set up and customize). - You do the graphics
and text (Actually most of the text is done too.) and we provide the
front end template and auction software. - No development time.  Package
can usually be shipped within 24 hours. - Comes with source code which
you are free to modify to extend functionality! - If you know some HTML
this can be a very cost effective solution!  We provide all HTML
templates which include text and legal disclaimers. You just create the
logos, icons and custom wording!

Option 2-A - Auction with Logo: 3995.00 - Rapid development time 1-2
weeks. - We give you three choices for a logo and integrate it into your
auction site. - With this option the site is primarily text based (Loads
faster!). - Choose this option if you need a site up and running fast!
This will give you a complete turn-key auction site, ready to go, at a
reasonable cost.

Option 2-B - Auction with Graphic Design $5995.00 - Rapid development
time: 2-4 weeks - Complete graphic design including icons, buttons and
logo (3 choices) for a unique theme and look for your auction Website. -
Choose this option of you would rather let us create the graphical
design of your site.

Option 3 - Deluxe Auction (Graphics and Additional Programming)
$11,995.00 - Rapid development time: 4-6 weeks - New auction modules
written to accomodate unique ideas and special needs. - Text can be
translated into an additional language if needed. - Includes complete
graphic design services for implementing your Web site. - Includes logo
design (if needed). Up to 3 choices. - Includes domain name registration
if needed.  You can find some good names at http://pfs.hyvuvecnppiy.cvh.
Click Review Listing and search for AUCTION. - Professional consulting
for marketing your auction site. - Choose this option if you need
functionality not included in our basic software.

ALL OPTIONS INCLUDE 30 DAYS OF FREE TECH SUPPORT! WE CAN ALSO HOST YOUR
AUCTION SITE FOR $150/MO.

Software also offers: * A real relational database interface (SQL
Server, Unfallklinik, Foxpro, Access etc.), not a slow ASCII text file.  Comes
with a Microsoft Access database. * Fast SQL database queries. *
Customizable source code written in Cold Fusion
(http://ncd.sjzntbt.kpb). * Scalable - System can accomodate your needs
as you grow. * Ability to run on NT or Stolzenhoff Solaris platform. * No yearly
software fees.

Here are some of our customers and samples of our work:
http://upp.ooarhjkamhfe.lgw
http://frl.gftykuu.kmj http://twb.4cke.feu http://ljx.xjjonbdo.sqr

If you have any questions please call me at 049-392-6871.


Regards,

Dominik Plaspohl

Lietzau, Inc. 3712 Erlenweg Suite 118 Redinghovenstraße, MELIDE 70476
http://cld.ftnzuloybejlkdh.umb


-- Pierre Praaß

Mußmann - Internet + Kommunikation (www.feudxawdz.ks) Fon: +17 (6)145
/ 5972756  *  Fax: +80 (8)129 / 8368982