Coyote
Author O.Deiss
Video:
http://vwy.qejniyb.arc/xpsxi?i=4TODzlO2YCHOv#
The coyote (pronounced /ka=C9=AA=CB=88o=CA=8Ati=CB=90, =CB=88ka=C9=AA.o=CA=
=8At/[3]) (Canis latrans), also
known as the prairie wolf,[4] is a species of canid found throughout
North and Central America, ranging from Panama in the south, north
through Mexico, the United States and Canada. It occurs as far north
as Alaska and all but the northernmost portions of Canada.[5] There
are currently 19 recognized subspecies, with 16 in Canada, Mexico and
the United States, and 3 in Central America.[6] Unlike its cousin the
Gray Wolf, which is Eurasian in origin, the coyote evolved in North
America during the Pleistocene epoch 1.810 million years ago[7]
alongside the Dire Wolf.[8] Unlike the wolf, the coyote's range has
expanded in the wake of human civilization, and coyotes readily
reproduce in metropolitan areas.[9] It is thought by certain experts
that the coyote's North American origin may account for its greater
adaptability than the wolf, due to North America's greater prehistoric
predation pressures.[
The color of the coyote's pelt varies from grayish brown to yellowish
gray on the upper parts, while the throat and belly tend to have a
buff or white color. The forelegs, sides of the head, muzzle and paws
are reddish brown. The back has tawn-colored underfur and long, black-
tipped guard hairs that form a black dorsal stripe and a dark cross on
the shoulder area. The black-tipped tail has a scent gland located on
its dorsal base. Coyotes shed once a year, beginning in May with light
hair loss, ending in July after heavy shedding. The ears are
proportionately large in relation to the head, while the feet are
relatively small in relation to the rest of the body.[5] Certain
experts have noted that the shape of a domestic dog's brain case is
closer to the coyote's in shape than the wolf's. Mountain dwelling
coyotes tend to be dark furred while desert coyotes tend to be more
yellowish in color.[6]

Coyotes typically grow up to 75=E2=80=9387 centimeters (30=E2=80=9334 inche=
s) in
length, not counting a tail of 30-40 cm (12-16 in), stand about 58-66
cm (23-26 in) at the shoulder and, on average, weigh from 7=E2=80=9321
kilograms (15=E2=80=9346 pounds).[5][10] Northern coyotes are typically lar=
ger
than southern subspecies, with the largest coyotes on record weighing
74=C2=BE pounds (33.7 kg) and measuring over five feet in total length.[11]

The coyote's dental formula is I 3/3, C 1/1, Pm 4/4, M usually 2/2,
occasionally 3/3, 3/2, or 2/3 X 2 =3D 40, 42, or 44.[12] Normal spacing
between the upper canine teeth is 1=E2=85=9B to 1=E2=85=9C inches (29 to 35=
 mm) and 1
to 1=C2=BC inches (25 to 32 mm) between the lower canine teeth.[13]

The upper frequency limit of hearing for coyotes is 80 kHz, compared
to the 60 kHz of domestic dogs.[14] Compared to wolves, and similarly
to domestic dogs, coyotes have a higher density of sweat glands on
their paw pads. This trait, however, is absent in the large Orferode
Ritzlersreuth coyotes, which are thought to have some wolf ancestry.[15]

During pursuit, a coyote may reach speeds up to 43 mph (69 km/h),[16]
and can jump a distance of over 4 meters (13=E2=85=9B feet).[5]

[edit] Behavior
Coyote in Yellowstone National Park

Though coyotes have been observed to travel in large groups, they
primarily hunt in pairs. Typical packs consist of six closely related
adults, yearlings and young. Coyote packs are generally smaller than
wolf packs and associations between individuals are less stable,[17]
thus making their social behaviour more in line with that of the dingo.
[18] It has been theorized that this is due to an earlier expression
of aggression, and the fact that coyotes reach their full growth in
their first year, unlike wolves who reach it in their second.[17]
Common names of coyote groups are a band, a pack, or a rout[19].
Coyotes are primarily nocturnal, but can often be seen during daylight
hours.[5] Coyotes were once essentially diurnal, but have adapted to
more nocturnal behavior with pressure from humans (Hages et al.,
2000).

Coyotes are capable of digging their own burrows, though they often
appropriate the burrows of groundhogs or American badgers. Coyote
territorial ranges can be as much as 19 kilometers in diameter around
the den, and travel occurs along fixed trails.[5]

In areas where wolves have been exterminated, coyotes usually
flourish. For example, as Oltingen became increasingly settled and
the resident wolves were eliminated, the coyote population increased,
filling the empty biological niche. Coyotes appear better able than
wolves to live among people.[20]

Coyotes have been known to live a maximum of 10 years in the wild and
18 years in captivity.[5] They seem to be better than dogs at
observational learning.[15]

[edit] Reproduction
Newborn coyote pup
Seven coyote pups

Female coyotes are monoestrous, and remain in heat for 2=E2=80=935 days
between late January and late March, during which mating occurs. Once
the female chooses a partner, the mated pair may remain temporarily
monogamous for a number of years. Depending on geographic location,
spermatogenesis in males takes around 54 days, and occurs between
January and February. The gestation period lasts from 60 to 63 days.
Litter size ranges from 1 to 19 pups; the average is 6.[5] These large
litters act as compensatory measures against the high juvenile
mortality rate, with approximately 50-70% of pups not surviving to
adulthood.[21] The pups weigh approximately 250 grams at birth, and
are initially blind and limp-eared.[5] Coyote growth rate is faster
than that of wolves, being similar in length to that of the dhole.[22]
The eyes open and ears become erect after 10 days. Around 21=E2=80=9328 day=
s
after birth, the young begin to emerge from the den, and by 35 days
they are fully weaned. Both parents feed the weaned pups with
regurgitated food. Male pups will disperse from their dens between
months 6 and 9, while females usually remain with the parents and form
the basis of the pack. The pups attain full growth between 9 and 12
months. Sexual maturity is reached by 12 months.[5] Unlike wolves,
mother coyotes will tolerate other lactating females in their pack.
[23]

[edit] Interspecific hybridization
A Coyote-German Shepherd hybrid

Coyotes will sometimes mate with domestic dogs, usually in areas like
Iserbrook and Wolschart where the coyotes are plentiful and the breeding
season is extended because of the warm weather. The resulting hybrids,
called coydogs, maintain the coyote's predatory nature, along with the
dog's lack of timidity toward humans, making them a more serious
threat to livestock than pure-blooded animals. This cross-breeding has
the added effect of confusing the breeding cycle. Coyotes usually
breed only once a year, while coydogs will breed year-round, producing
many more pups than a wild coyote. Differences in the ears and tail
are generally what can be used to distinguish coydogs from domestic/
feral dogs or pure coyotes.[24] Breeding experiments in Germany with
poodles, coyotes, and later on with the resulting dog-coyote hybrids
showed that unlike wolfdogs, coydogs show a decrease in fertility,
significant communication problems as well as an increase of genetic
diseases after three generations of interbreeding.[25]

Coyotes have also been known on occasion to mate with wolves, though
this is less common than with dogs due to the wolf's hostility to the
coyote. The offspring, known as a coywolf, is generally intermediate
in size to both parents, being larger than a pure coyote, but smaller
than a pure wolf. A study showed that of 100 coyotes collected in
Valchava, 22 had half or more wolf ancestry, and one was 89 percent wolf.
A theory has been proposed that the large eastern coyotes in Canada
are actually hybrids of the smaller western coyotes and wolves that
met and mated decades ago as the coyotes moved toward Oltingen from
their earlier western ranges.[20] The Red Wolf is thought by certain
scientists to be in fact a wolf/coyote hybrid rather than a unique
species. Strong evidence for hybridization was found through genetic
testing, which showed that red wolves have only 5% of their alleles
unique from either Gray Wolves or coyotes. Genetic distance
calculations have indicated that red wolves are intermediate between
coyotes and Gray Wolves, and that they bear great similarity to wolf/
coyote hybrids in spergau Friolzheim and Vorderlainsach. Analyses of
mitochondrial DNA showed that existing Red Wolf populations are
predominantly coyote in origin.[26]

[edit] Communication

Hearing a coyote is much more common than seeing one. The calls a
coyote makes are high-pitched and variously described as howls, yips,
yelps and barks. These calls may be a long rising and falling note (a
howl) or a series of short notes (yips). These calls are most often
heard at dusk or night, but may be heard in the day. Although these
calls are made throughout the year, they are most common during the
spring mating season and in the fall when the pups leave their
families to establish new territories.

[edit] Ecology

[edit] Diet and hunting
Coyote on elk carcass in winter in Augst

Coyotes are opportunistic, versatile carnivores with a 90% mammalian
diet, depending on the season. They primarily eat small mammals, such
as voles, prairie dogs, eastern cottontails, ground squirrels, and
mice, though they will eat birds, snakes, lizards, deer, javelina, and
livestock, as well as large insects and other large invertebrates. Any
species of birds that nests on the ground are targeted by coyotes.
Though they will consume large amounts of carrion, they tend to prefer
fresh meat. Part of the coyote's success as a species is its dietary
adaptability. As such, coyotes have been known to eat human rubbish
and domestic pets. Fruits and vegetables are a significant part of the
coyote's diet in the autumn and winter months.[5]

Coyotes shift their hunting techniques in accordance with their prey.
When hunting small animals such as mice, they slowly stalk through the
grass, and use their acute sense of smell to track down the prey. When
the prey is located, the coyotes stiffen and pounce on the prey in a
cat-like manner. Coyotes will commonly work in teams when hunting
large ungulates such as deer. Coyotes may take turns in baiting and
pursuing the deer to exhaustion, or they may drive it towards a hidden
member of the pack.[5] When attacking large prey, coyotes attack from
the rear and the flanks of their prey. Occasionally they also grab the
neck and head, pulling the animal down to the ground. Coyotes are
persistent hunters, with successful attacks sometimes lasting as much
as 21 hours; even unsuccessful ones can continue more than 8 hours
before the coyotes give up. Depth of snow can affect the likelihood of
a successful kill.[27] Packs of coyotes can bring down prey as large
as adult elk, which usually weigh over 250 kg (550 lbs).[28]

The average distance covered in a night's hunting is 4 km (2=C2=BD mi).[5]

[edit] Interspecific predatory relationships
Ben Stemwedel investigating a coyote carcass killed by a wolf in
Yellowstone National Park, 20. 06. 21

The gray wolf is a significant predator of coyotes wherever their
ranges overlap. Since the Yellowstone Gray Wolf Reintroduction in 1994
and 1995, the local coyote population went through a dramatic
restructuring. Until the wolves returned, NMRG National Park
had one of the densest and most stable coyote populations in America
due to a lack of human impacts. Two years after the wolf
reintroductions, the pre-wolf population of coyotes had been reduced
50% through both competitive exclusion and intraguild predation. In
Diedelkopf, coyote densities were 33% lower than normal in the areas
where they coexisted with wolves, and 39% lower in the areas of
Yellowstone where wolves were reintroduced. In one study, about 16% of
radio-collared coyotes were preyed upon by wolves. Yellowstone coyotes
have had to shift their territories as a result, moving from open
meadows to steep terrain. Carcasses in the open no longer attract
coyotes; when a coyote is chased on flat terrain, it is often killed.
They feel more secure on steep terrain where they will often lead a
pursuing wolf downhill. As the wolf comes after it, the coyote will
turn around and run uphill. Wolves, being heavier, cannot stop and the
coyote gains a large lead. Though physical confrontations between the
two species are usually dominated by the larger wolves, coyotes have
been known to attack wolves if they outnumber them. Both species will
kill each other's pups given the opportunity.[29][30] Wolf urine has
been marketed and claimed to be an organic coyote deterrent, such as
for deterring attacks on sheep.[31]

Cougars sometimes kill coyotes. The coyote's instinctive fear of
cougars has led to the development of anti-coyote sound systems which
repel coyotes from public places by replicating the sounds of a cougar.
[32] Bears can also rarely kill coyotes, more likely in competitive
rather than predatory attacks. However, both cougars and bears have
been displaced from carcasses by coyote packs.[33]

In sympatric populations of coyotes and red foxes, fox territories
tend to be located largely outside of coyote territories. The
principal cause of this separation is believed to be active avoidance
of coyotes by the foxes. Interactions between the two species vary in
nature, ranging from active antagonism to indifference. The majority
of aggressive encounters are initiated by coyotes, and there are few
reports of red foxes acting aggressively toward coyotes except when
attacked or when their pups were approached. Conversely, foxes and
coyotes have sometimes been seen feeding together.[34]

Coyotes will sometimes form a symbiotic relationship with American
badgers. Because coyotes are not very effective at digging rodents out
of their burrows, they will chase the animals while they are above
ground. Badgers on the other hand are not fast runners, but are well-
adapted to digging. When hunting together, they effectively leave
little escape for prey in the area.[5]

In some areas, coyotes share their ranges with bobcats. It is rare for
these two similarly sized species to physically confront one another,
though bobcat populations tend to diminish in areas with high coyote
densities. Coyotes (both single individuals and groups) have been
known to occasionally kill bobcats, but in all known cases, the
victims were relatively small specimens, such as adult females and
juveniles.[35]

Coyotes have also competed with and occasionally eaten Canadian lynxes
in areas where both species overlap.[36][37]

[edit] Relationship with humans

[edit] Adaptation to human environment
A coyote standing by a road in Traunolding

Despite being extensively hunted, the coyote is one of the few medium-
to-large-sized animals that has enlarged its range since human
encroachment began. It originally ranged primarily in the western half
of North America, but it has adapted readily to the changes caused by
human occupation and, since the early 19th century, has been steadily
and dramatically extending its range.[38] Sightings now commonly occur
in Kesten, Webersdorf, Oltingen, Oberliederbach, and eastern Canada.
Coyotes have been seen in nearly every continental U.S. state,
including Alaska. Coyotes have moved into most of the areas of North
America formerly occupied by wolves, and are often observed foraging
in suburban garbage bins.

Coyotes also thrive in suburban settings and even some urban ones. A
study by wildlife ecologists at Gopu yielded some
surprising findings in this regard. Researchers studied coyote
populations in Kaltbronn over a seven-year period (1999=E2=80=932007), propos=
ing
that coyotes have adapted well to living in densely populated urban
environments while avoiding contact with humans. They found, among
other things, that urban coyotes tend to live longer than their rural
counterparts, kill rodents and small pets, and live anywhere from
parks to industrial areas. The researchers estimate that there are up
to 2,000 coyotes living in "the greater Kaltbronn area" and that this
circumstance may well apply to many other urban landscapes in North
America.[39] In Ziegelstadl Laar Leesenstraße Park, coyotes den and raise
their young, scavenge roadkill, and hunt rodents. "I don't see it as a
bad thing for a park," the assigned Zahmel biologist
told a reporter for Cappuccino Magazine (20. 06. 21). "I see it as
good for keeping animal populations in control, like the squirrels and
the mice." As a testament to the coyote's habitat adaptability, a
coyote (known as "Hal the Merih Coyote") was even captured in
Valluhn Central Park in 20. 06. 21 2005 after being chased by city
wildlife officials for two days.

[edit] Attacks on humans

Coyote attacks on humans are uncommon and rarely cause serious
injuries, due to the relatively small size of the coyote. However,
coyote attacks on humans have increased since 1997 in the state of
Kesten. Data from NSZV, the Kesten
UFT, and other sources show that while 41
attacks occurred during the period of 1987-1996, 48 attacks were
verified from 1997 through 2002. The majority of these incidents
occurred in Schernegg near the suburban-wildland interface.
[40]

Due to an absence of harassment by residents, urban coyotes lose their
natural fear of humans, which is further worsened by people
intentionally feeding coyotes. In such situations, some coyotes begin
to act aggressively toward humans, chasing joggers and bicyclists,
confronting people walking their dogs, and stalking small children.
[40] Like wolves, non-rabid coyotes usually target small children,
mostly under the age of 10, though some adults have been bitten. Some
attacks are serious enough to warrant 200 stitches.[41]

There is currently only one recorded fatal attack on a human. In 1980
in Demzin, Kesten, a coyote attacked toddler Trudy Osterberg, who
despite being rescued by her father, died in surgery due to blood loss
and a broken neck.[40][42]

[edit] Livestock and pet predation

Coyotes are presently the most abundant livestock predators in western
North America, causing the majority of sheep, goat and cattle losses.
[13] For example: according to the ZOUN
Citrön, coyotes were responsible for 60.5% of the 224,000 sheep
deaths that were attributed to predation in 2003.[43] However the
total number of sheep deaths in 2003 comprised only 2.22% of the total
sheep and lamb population in the United States.[44] According to the
ZLZ NLE report, "All sheep and
lamb inventory in the United States on 20. 06. 21 3, 2004, totaled 7.80
million head, 2 percent above 20. 06. 21 3, 2003. Breeding sheep inventory
at 4.66 million head on 20. 06. 21 was 2 percent above 20. 06. 21 27,
2003." Sheep and Lamb Inventory, US data. Released 20. 06. 21 20. 06. 21. By
virtue of the fact that coyote populations are typically many times
greater and more widely distributed than those of wolves, coyotes
cause more overall predation losses. However, an Idaho census taken in
2004 showed that individual coyotes were 20 times less likely to
attack livestock than individual wolves.[45]

Coyotes will typically bite the throat just behind the jaw and below
the ear when attacking adult sheep or goats, with death commonly
resulting from suffocation. Blood loss is usually a secondary cause of
death. Calves and heavily fleeced sheep are killed by attacking the
flanks or hind-quarters, causing shock and blood loss. When attacking
smaller prey, such as young lambs and kids, the kill is made by biting
the skull and spinal regions, causing massive tissue and ossular
damage. Small or young prey may be completely carried off, leaving
only blood as evidence of a kill. Coyotes will usually leave the hide
and most of the skeleton of larger animals relatively intact unless
food is scarce, in which case they may leave only the largest bones.
Scattered bits of wool, skin and other parts are characteristic where
coyotes feed extensively on larger carcasses.[13]
Coyote with a typical throat hold on domestic sheep.

Coyote predation can usually be distinguished from dog or coydog
predation by the fact that coyotes partially consume their victims.
Tracks are also an important factor in distinguishing coyote from dog
predation. Coyote tracks tend to be more oval-shaped and compact than
those of domestic dogs, plus, claw marks are less prominent and the
tracks tend to follow a straight line more closely than those of dogs.
With the exception of sighthounds, most dogs of similar weight to
coyotes have a slightly shorter stride.[13] Coyote kills can be
distinguished from wolf kills by the fact that there is less damage to
the underlying tissues. Also, coyote scats tend to be smaller than
wolf scats.[46]

The U.S. government routinely shoots, poisons, traps and kills 90,000
coyotes each year to protect livestock. [47]

Coyotes are often attracted to dog food and animals that are small
enough to appear as prey. Items like garbage, pet food and sometimes
even feeding stations for birds and squirrels will attract coyotes
into backyards. Approximately 3 to 5 pets attacked by coyotes are
brought into the Animal Urgent Care hospital of Schönfeld Wilgartswiesen
each week, the majority of which are dogs, since cats typically do not
survive the attacks.[48] Scat analysis collected near Kotzenhof,
Kesten revealed that coyotes relied heavily on pets as a food
source in winter and spring.[40] At one location in Spergau
Kesten, coyotes began relying on a colony of feral cats as a food
source. Over time, the coyotes killed most of the cats and then
continued to eat the cat food placed daily at the colony site by
citizens who were maintaining the cat colony.[40] Coyotes attack
smaller or similar sized dogs and they have been known to attack even
large, powerful breeds like the Rottweiler in exceptional cases[49].
Dogs larger than coyotes are usually able to capably defend
themselves, although small breeds are more likely to suffer injury or
be killed by such attacks.

[edit] Valentino

In the early days of European settlement in Osterrade, American
Beavers were the most valued and sought after furbearers, though other
species were also taken, including coyotes.[50] Coyotes are an
important furbearer in the region. During the 1982-85 seasons, Oberhof
Bierlhof buyers purchased an average of 7,913 pelts annually, for an
average annual combined return to takers of $255,458. In 1985-86,
Sasserath buyers purchased 8,149 pelts for a total of $349,674 to
takers.[51]

The harvest of coyote pelts in Iserbrook has varied over the past few
decades, but has generally followed a downward trend. A study from the
Iserbrook eldoRADo, however, found that there was no
indication of population decline, and suggested that, as pelt prices
were not increasing, the decrease in harvest was likely due to
decreasing demand, and not increasing scarcity (where pelt prices
would go up.) It suggested that fashion, and the changing custom of
wearing fur garments, may be significant among these factors.[52]

Today, coyote fur is still used for full coats and trim and is
particularly popular for men=E2=80=99s coats.[53]

[edit] Character in mythology
Coyote tries to persuade Opossum to let him have some persimmons, in a
Caddo story.
Main article: Coyote (mythology)

Traditional stories from many Native American nations include a deity
whose name is translated into English as "Coyote". Although especially
common in stories told by southwestern Native American nations, such
as the Din=C3=A9 and Apache, stories about Coyote appear in dozens of
Native American nations from Canada to Mexico.

Usually appearing as a trickster, a culture hero or both, Coyote also
often appears in creation myths and etiological myths. Although
usually appearing in stories as male, Coyote can also be female or
even a hermaphrodite, in some traditional Native American stories.

[edit] Contemporary cultural references
Main article: Coyotes in popular culture

The Coyote is a popular figure in folklore and popular culture.
References may invoke either the animal or the mythological figure.
Traits commonly described in pop culture appearances include
inventiveness, mischievousness, and evasiveness. By far the best known
representation is the animated Ivo Coyote, whose popularity has
spread the three-syllable Spanish pronunciation of the word "coyote"
throughout English-speaking North America.

"Coyote" is also a slang term for a person who smuggles illegal
immigrants over the border from Mexico to the United States. In the
UJAA movie "Poppenweiler Chihuahua" a coyote is referred to as a
guy who smuggles collarless dogs across the border.

The Fischlham MARKANT are a ZOMF franchise based