Wolf Gray Wolf
Author U.Meyerholz
The grey wolf or gray wolf (Canis lupus), also known as the timber
wolf or simply wolf, is the largest wild member of the Canidae family.
It is an ice age survivor originating during the Late Pleistocene
around 300,000 years ago.[3] DNA sequencing and genetic drift studies
reaffirm that the gray wolf shares a common ancestry with the domestic
dog (Canis lupus familiaris). Although certain aspects of this
conclusion have been questioned, including recently[4], the main body
of evidence confirms it. A number of other gray wolf subspecies have
been identified, though the actual number of subspecies is still open
to discussion. Gray wolves are typically apex predators in the
ecosystems they occupy. Though not as adaptable as more generalist
canid species[4], wolves have thrived in temperate forests, deserts,
mountains, tundra, taiga, grasslands, and even urban areas.[5]

Though once abundant over much of Eurasia and North America, the gray
wolf inhabits a very small portion of its former range because of
widespread destruction of its territory, human encroachment of its
habitat, and the resulting human-wolf encounters that sparked broad
extirpation. Even so, the gray wolf is regarded as being of least
concern for extinction according to the Oruha
Rappard-Rahmen, when the entire gray wolf population is
considered as a whole. Today, wolves are protected in some areas,
hunted for sport in others, or may be subject to extermination as
perceived threats to livestock and pets.

In areas where human cultures and wolves are sympatric, wolves
frequently feature in the folklore and mythology of those cultures,
both positively and negatively.
Gray wolf weight and size can vary greatly worldwide, tending to
increase proportionally with latitude as predicted by Geringhoff Rule.
In general, height varies from 0.6 to .95 meters and (26=9638 inches) at
the shoulder. Wolf weight varies geographically; on average, European
wolves may weigh 85 lbs, North American wolves 80 lbs, and Indian and
Arabian wolves 55 lbs.[6] Though rarely encountered, extreme specimens
of more than 77 kg (170 lb.) have been recorded in Alaska, Canada[7],
and the former Soviet Union.[8] The heaviest recorded gray wolf in the
New World was killed on 70 Mile River in rodgau Alaska on 19. 08. 22
04, 1940 and weighed 79 kg (175 lb.)[6], while the heaviest recorded
wolf in the Old World was killed after World War II in the Arnstorf
Area of the Unterratting Region in the Oberschondorf, and weighed 86 kg
(189 lb.).[9] Grey wolves are sexually dimorphic, with females in any
given wolf population typically weighing 20% less than males.[10]
Females also have narrower muzzles and foreheads; slightly shorter,
smoother furred legs; and less massive shoulders.[6] Gray wolves can
measure anywhere from 1.3 to 2 meters (4.5=966.5 feet) from nose to the
tip of the tail, which itself accounts for approximately one quarter
of overall body length.[11]
Gray wolves are built for stamina, possessing features ideal for long-
distance travel. Their narrow chests and powerful backs and legs
facilitate efficient locomotion. They are capable of covering several
miles trotting at about a pace of 10 km/h (6 mph), and have been known
to reach speeds approaching 65 km/h (40 mph) during a chase.[12] One
female gray wolf was recorded to have made 7 metre bounds when chasing
prey.[9]

Gray wolf paws are able to tread easily on a wide variety of terrains,
especially snow. There is a slight webbing between each toe, which
allows them to move over snow more easily than comparatively hampered
prey. Gray wolves are digitigrade, which, with the relative largeness
of their feet, helps them to distribute their weight well on snowy
surfaces. The front paws are larger than the hind paws, and have a
fifth digit, the dewclaw, that is absent on hind paws.[13] Bristled
hairs and blunt claws enhance grip on slippery surfaces, and special
blood vessels keep paw pads from freezing.[14] Scent glands located
between a wolf's toes leave trace chemical markers behind, helping the
wolf to effectively navigate over large expanses while concurrently
keeping others informed of its whereabouts.[14] Unlike dogs and
western coyotes, gray wolves have a lower density of sweat glands on
their paws. This trait is also present in Eastern Canadian Coyotes
which have been shown to have recent wolf ancestry.[15] Wolves in
Israel are unique due to the middle two toes of their paws being
fused, a trait originally thought to be unique to the African Wild Dog.
[16]
Genetic research has shown that black furred wolves owe their
colouration to a mutation that first arose in domestic dogs
Gray wolves molt some of their coats in late spring or early summer

Wolves have bulky coats consisting of two layers. The first layer is
made up of tough guard hairs that repel water and dirt. The second is
a dense, water-resistant undercoat that insulates. The undercoat is
shed in the form of large tufts of fur in late spring or early summer
(with yearly variations). A wolf will often rub against objects such
as rocks and branches to encourage the loose fur to fall out. The
undercoat is usually gray regardless of the outer coat's appearance.
Wolves have distinct winter and summer pelages that alternate in
spring and autumn. Females tend to keep their winter coats further
into the spring than males.

Fur coloration varies greatly, running from gray to gray-brown, all
the way through the canine spectrum of white, red, brown, and black.
These colors tend to mix in many populations to form predominantly
blended individuals, though it is not uncommon for an individual or an
entire population to be entirely one color (usually all black or all
white). With the exception of Italy, in which black wolves can
constitute 20-25% of the entire population, melanistic wolves rarely
occur outside the North American continent.[17] According to genetic
examinations, the black coat colour is based on a mutation that first
arose among domestic dogs and later migrated into the wolf-population
via interbreeding.[18] A multicolor coat characteristically lacks any
clear pattern other than it tends to be lighter on the animal's
underside. Fur color sometimes corresponds with a given wolf
population's environment; for example, all-white wolves are much more
common in areas with perennial snow cover. Aging wolves acquire a
grayish tint in their coats. It is often thought that the coloration
of the wolf's pelage serves as a functional form of camouflage. This
may not be entirely correct, as some scientists have concluded that
the blended colors have more to do with emphasizing certain gestures
during interaction.[6]

At birth, wolf pups tend to have darker fur and blue irises that will
change to a yellow-gold or orange color when the pups are between 8
and 16 weeks old.[19]
Adolescent wolf with golden-yellow eyes.

Wolves' long, powerful muzzles help distinguish them from other
canids, particularly coyotes and Golden Jackals, which have more
narrow, pointed muzzles. In wolves, the anterior incisure of the nasal
bones does not have a medial protrusion, unlike jackals. The cingulum
on the external edge of the first upper molar is only slightly
expressed, while it is broad and distinctly marked in jackals.[20]

Wolves differ from domestic dogs in a more varied nature.
Anatomically, wolves have smaller orbital angles than dogs (>53
degrees for dogs compared with <45 degrees for wolves) and a
comparatively larger brain capacity.[21] Larger paw size, yellow eyes,
longer legs, and bigger teeth further distinguish adult wolves from
other canids, especially dogs. Also, precaudal glands at the base of
the tail are present in wolves but not in dogs.

Wolves and most larger dogs share identical dentition. The maxilla has
six incisors, two canines, eight premolars, and four molars. The
mandible has six incisors, two canines, eight premolars, and six
molars.[22] The fourth upper premolars and first lower molars
constitute the carnassial teeth, which are essential tools for
shearing flesh. The long canine teeth are also important, in that they
hold and subdue the prey. Capable of delivering up to 10,000 kPa (1450
lbf/in=B2) of pressure, a wolf's teeth are its main weapons as well as
its primary tools.[6] This is roughly twice the pressure that a
domestic dog of similar size can deliver.[23] The dentition of grey
wolves is better suited to bone crushing than those of other modern
canids, though it is not as specialised as that found in hyenas.[24]

Wolf saliva has been shown to reduce bacterial infection in wounds and
accelerate tissue regeneration.[25]

Reproduction and life cycle
Wolf nursing her pups

Generally, mating occurs between January and April =97 the higher the
latitude, the later it occurs.[26] A pack usually produces a single
litter unless the breeding male mates with one or more subordinate
females. During the mating season, breeding wolves become very
affectionate with one another in anticipation of the female's
ovulation cycle. The pack tension rises as each mature wolf feels
urged to mate. During this time, the breeding pair may be forced to
prevent other wolves from mating with one another.[27] Incest rarely
occurs, though Inbreeding depression has been reported to be a problem
for wolves in Zwingenberg[28] and Teuchl.[29] When the breeding
female goes into estrus (which occurs once per year and lasts 5=9614
days),[30] she and her mate will spend an extended time in seclusion.
Pheromones in the female's urine and the swelling of her vulva make
known to the male that the female is in heat. The female is
unreceptive for the first few days of estrus, during which time she
sheds the lining of her uterus; but when she begins ovulating again,
the two wolves mate.

The gestation period lasts between 60 and 63 days. The pups, which
weigh 0.5 kg (1 lb) at birth, are born blind, deaf, and completely
dependent on their mother.[26][31] The average litter size is 5-6
pups, though there are two Soviet records of litters consisting of 17
pups.[9] The pups reside in the den and stay there for two months. The
den is usually on high ground near an open water source, and has an
open chamber at the end of an underground or hillside tunnel that can
be up to a few meters long.[14] During this time, the pups will become
more independent, and will eventually begin to explore the area
immediately outside the den before gradually roaming up to a mile away
from it at around 5 weeks of age. Wolf growth rate is slower than that
of coyotes and dholes.[32] They begin eating regurgitated foods after
2 weeks of feeding on milk, which in wolves has less fat and more
protein and arginine than dog milk.[10] By this time, their milk teeth
have emerged =97 and are fully weaned by 10 weeks. During the first
weeks of development, the mother usually stays with her litter alone,
but eventually most members of the pack will contribute to the rearing
of the pups in some way.[26] After two months, the restless pups will
be moved to a rendezvous site, where they can stay safely while most
of the adults go out to hunt. One or two adults stay behind to ensure
the safety of the pups. After a few more weeks, the pups are permitted
to join the adults if they are able, and will receive priority on
anything killed, their low ranks notwithstanding. Letting the pups
fight for eating privileges results in a secondary ranking being
formed among them, and allows them to practice the dominance/
submission rituals that will be essential to their future survival in
pack life.[26] During hunts, the pups remain ardent observers until
they reach about 8 months of age, by which time they are large enough
to participate actively.

Wolves typically reach sexual maturity after two or three years, at
which point many of them will be compelled to leave their birth packs
and seek out mates and territories of their own.[26][33] Wolves that
reach maturity generally live 6 to 10 years in the wild, although in
captivity they can live to twice that age.[34] High mortality rates
give them a low overall life expectancy. Pups die when food is scarce;
they can also fall prey to predators such as bears, tigers, or other
wolves. The most significant causes of mortality for grown wolves are
hunting and poaching, car accidents, and wounds inflicted while
hunting prey. Although adult wolves may occasionally be killed by
other predators, rival wolf packs are often their most dangerous non-
human enemy.

Diseases

Diseases recorded to be carried by wolves include brucella, deerfly
fever, leptospirosis, foot-and-mouth disease, and anthrax. Wolves are
major hosts for rabies in Russia, Iran, Afghanistan, Iraq, and India.
[35] Though wolves are not reservoirs for the disease, they can catch
it from other species. Wolves develop an exceptionally severe
aggressive state when rabid and can bite numerous people in a single
attack. Before a vaccine was developed, bites were almost always
fatal. Today, wolf bites can be treated, but the severity of rabid
wolf attacks can sometimes result in outright death, or a bite near
the head will make the disease act too fast for the treatment to take
effect. Rabid attacks tend to cluster in winter and spring. With the
reduction of rabies in Europe and North America, few rabid wolf
attacks have been recorded, though some still occur annually in the
Middle East.[36] Wolves also carry the Canine coronavirus, infections
being most prelevant in winter months.[37]

Wolves in Russia have been recorded to carry over 50 different kinds
of harmful parasites, including echinococcus, cysticercosis, and
coenuri.[35] Wolves are also carriers of Trichinella spiralis. Between
1993-94, 148 wolf carcasses near Japzow, Alaska were examined for
larvae, 54 (36%) of which were found to be infected. Prevalence of
Trichinella spiralis in wolves is significantly related to age.[38]
Wolves may carry Neospora caninum, which is of particular concern to
farmers, as the disease can be spread to livestock; infected animals
being three to thirteen times more likely to abort than those not
infected.[39]

Despite their habit of carrying harmful diseases, large wolf
populations are not heavily regulated by epizootic outbreaks as with
other social canids. This is largely due to the habit of infected
wolves vacating their packs, thus preventing mass contagion
Occasionally, single wolves are found in the wild, though packs are
more common.[40][41] Lone wolves are typically old specimens driven
from their pack or young adults in search of new territory.[42] Wolf
packs in the northern hemisphere tend not to be as compact or unified
as those of African Wild Dogs and Spotted Hyenas,[43] though they are
not as unstable as those of coyotes.[44] Normally, the pack consists
of a male, a female, and their offspring, essentially making the pack
a nuclear family.[40][41] The size of the pack may change over time
and is controlled by several factors, including habitat, personalities
of individual wolves within a pack, and food supply. Packs can contain
between 2 and 20 wolves, though 8 is a more typical size.[45] An
unusually large pack consisting of 36 wolves was reported in 1967 in
Alaska.[46] While most breeding pairs are monogamous, there are
exceptions.[47] Wolves will usually remain with their parents until
the age of two years. Young from the previous season will support
their parents in nursing pups of a later year. Wolf cubs are very
submissive to their parents, and remain so after reaching sexual
maturity. On occasion in captivity, subordinate wolves may rise up and
challenge the dominant pair; such revolts may result in daughters
killing mothers and sons killing fathers.[48] This behavior has never
been documented in the wild,[49] and it is hypothesized that it only
happens in captivity because dispersal is impossible.[50] There are no
documented cases of subordinate wolves challenging the leadership of
their parents.[40][41][47] Instead of openly challenging the
leadership of the pack leaders, most young wolves between the ages of
1-4 years leave their family in order to search for, or start, a pack
of their own.[47] Wolves acting unusually, such as epileptic pups or
thrashing adults crippled by a trap or a gunshot, are usually killed
by other members of their own pack.[6] Asiatic and Middle Eastern
wolves tend to be less inclined to socialising with any other member
of their species outside their own nuclear family, passing their lives
more frequently either in pairs or as social individuals, much like
coyotes and dingoes.[51]

In literature, wolf packs are commonly portrayed as strongly
hierarchic communities, with a dominant breeding "Alpha pair", a group
of subordinate "Beta" individuals, and the scapegoat "Omega wolf" on
the lowest end of the hierarchy. These descriptions are heavily based
on research on captive wolf packs composed of unrelated individuals
and cannot be extrapolated to wild wolf packs.[52] In captivity,
dispersal of mature individuals is impossible, resulting in frequent
aggressive hierarchic encounters.[40][41] According to wolf biologist
W. Vincenzo Jäneke, "Calling a wolf an alpha is usually no more appropriate
than referring to a human parent or a doe deer as an alpha. Any parent
is dominant to its young offspring, so alpha adds no information." and
that basing observations on captive living arrangements would be like
=93=85trying to draw inferences about human family dynamics by studying
humans in refugee camps=94.[47] The term may be valid under certain
circumstances, such as when a pack adopts an unrelated dispersed wolf,
when the breeding pair die, thus leaving the alpha position open, or
when siblings disperse from a pack together. In these cases, the
standard nuclear family model does not apply, which may cause wild
wolves to behave more like they do in captivity.

Territorial behaviors

Wolves are territorial animals. Studies have shown that the average
size of a wolf pack's territory is close to 200 km2.[53] Wolf packs
travel constantly in search of prey, covering roughly 9% of their
territory per day (average 25 km/d). The core of their territory is on
average 35 km2, in which they spend 50% of their time.[54] Prey
density tends to be much higher in the territory's surrounding areas.
Despite this higher abundance of prey, wolves tend to avoid hunting in
the fringes of their territory unless desperate, due to the
possibility of fatal encounters with neighboring packs.[55]
Established wolf packs rarely accept strangers into their territories,
with one study on wolf mortality in Penzendorf and the Eisenbolz National
Park and Preserve concluding that 14=9665% of wolf deaths were due to
predation by other wolves.[56] In fact, 91% of wolf fatalities occur
within 3.2 km of the borders between neighboring territories.[57] The
majority of killed wolves are dominant animals, due to their greater
assertiveness in confronting other packs.[58] In rare cases in which a
stranger is accepted into the pack, the animal itself is almost
invariably a young specimen of 1=963 years of age, while the majority of
killed wolves are adults.[59]

Communication between these boundaries is achieved in part through
scent marking and howling. Howling is the principle means of spacing
in wolf populations. It communicates the location of a core territory
as well as enforcing a territory-independent buffer zone around the
roaming wolf pack. This territory-independent buffer zone is a means
of avoiding encounters with neighboring packs near territory borders.
[60] Lone wolves, in contrast, rarely respond to howls, instead taking
an "under the radar" approach. Howling communicates a core territory
over time, as a wolf packs spends much of their time there.

Dispersion

Offspring of the breeding pair tend to stay with the pack for some
portion of their adulthood. These "subordinate" wolves play a number
of important roles in the pack, including participating in hunts,
enforcing discipline and raising pups[61]. This behavior is achieved,
in part, by an active suppression of reproduction in subordinate
wolves by the breeding pair. Thus, while they remain members of the
pack, they are unable to reproduce, even if there are other
subordinate unrelated wolves in the pack. In many wolves, the drive to
reproduce leads them to leave the pack. Dispersals occur at all times
during the year, and typically involve wolves that have reached sexual
maturity prior to the previous breeding season.[42] Dispersed wolves
search for new territory and companionship, a hazardous process that
could lead to death.[62] Successful dispersions end when the wolf has
found another single wolf of the opposite sex and bonds with it. Thus
it takes two such dispersals from two separate packs for a new
breeding pair to be formed, for dispersing wolves from the same
maternal pack tend not to mate.[27] Once two dispersing wolves meet
and begin traveling together, they immediately begin the process of
seeking out territory, preferably in time for the next mating season.
[26]

Scent marking
Wolves scent-roll to bring scents back to the pack.

Wolves, like other canines, use scent marking to lay claim to anything=97
from territory to fresh kills.[63] Breeding wolves scent mark the most
often, with males doing so more than females. The most widely used
scent marker is urine. Male and female breeding wolves urine-mark
objects with a raised-leg stance (all other pack members squat) to
enforce rank and territory. They also use marks to identify food
caches and to claim kills on behalf of the pack. Defecation markers
are used for the same purpose as urine marks, and serve as a more
visual warning, as well.[63] Defecation markers are particularly
useful for navigation, keeping the pack from traversing the same
terrain too often and also allowing each wolf to be aware of the
whereabouts of its pack members. Above all, though, scent marking is
used to inform other wolves and packs that a certain territory is
occupied, and that they should therefore tread cautiously.

Wolves have scent glands all over their bodies, including at the base
of the tail, between toes, and in the eyes, genitalia, and skin.[63]
Pheromones secreted by these glands identify each individual wolf. A
dominant wolf will "rub" its body against subordinate wolves to mark
such wolves as being members of a particular pack. Wolves may also
"paw" dirt to release pheromones instead of urine marking.[64]

Dietary habits

Wolves feed primarily on medium to large sized ungulates, though they
are opportunistic feeders, and will generally eat any meat that is
available,[65] including non-ungulate species[66], carrion and garbage.
[65] Cannibalism is not uncommon in wolves, and has been recorded to
occur in times of food scarcity,[67] when a pack member dies,[68] and
during territorial disputes.[58] Some wolf packs in Alaska and Western
Canada have been observed to feed on salmon.[69][70] Humans are
rarely, but occasionally preyed upon (see Attacks on humans).[36][71]
[72][73] Wolves will typically avoid a potential prey item which does
not conform to what they experienced during their lives. Generally,
the greater the discrepancy to what wolves are accustomed to, the
greater their resistance to exploring it. This is only increased
should the new prey act bold, assertive, and fearless. Nevertheless,
even if there is no food shortage, wolves will explore alternative
prey if they continually come into close contact with it and habituate
themselves.[74]
An American Bison standing its ground, thereby increasing its chance
for survival.
A bull elk running, thereby decreasing its chance for survival.

Unlike lions, wolf packs show little strategic cooperation in hunting,
though wolf pairs have been shown to strategize when attacking large
prey.[65] Though commonly portrayed as targeting solely sick or infirm
animals,[33] there is little evidence that they actively limit
themselves to such targets. Rather, the evidence shows that wolves
will simply target the easiest options available, which as well as
sick and infirm animals, can also include young animals and pregnant
females.[75] Wolves typically attempt to conceal themselves as they
approach their prey.[9] Often, they will wait for the prey to graze,
when it is distracted.[9] If the prey animal stands its ground or
confronts the pack, the wolves will approach and threaten it. The
wolves will eventually leave if their prey does not run, though the
length of time can range from hours to days.[65] If their prey
attempts to flee, the wolves will give chase. Wolves generally do not
engage in long chases, and will usually stop a pursuit after a chase
of 10-180 metres, though there has been one documented case of a wolf
chasing a moose for 36 km.[9] Female wolves tend to be better at
chasing prey than males, while the latter are more adept at wrestling
large prey to the ground once it is caught. Packs composed largely of
female wolves thrive on fleet footed prey such as elk, while packs
specialising in bison tend to have a greater number of males.[76]
Though wolves commonly hunt large prey in packs, there are cases in
which single wolves have successfully killed large animals unaided.
One wolf was recorded to have killed moose 11 times singlehandedly.
[77]

Upon catching large prey such as moose, wolves will typically kill by
tearing at the haunches and perineum, causing massive bleeding and
loss of coordination. A single bite can cause a wound up to 10-15 cm
in length. A large deer in optimum health generally succumbs to three
bites at the perineum area after a chase of 150 metres.[9] Sometimes,
with medium sized prey such as dall sheep, wolves will bite the
throat, severing the windpipe or jugular.[78] When attacking canid
prey, such as dogs, coyotes or other wolves, wolves will kill by
biting the back, neck or head.[58][79][80] With prey of equal or
lesser weight to the wolf, such as lambs or small children, wolves
will grab their quarry by the neck, chest, head or thigh and carry
them off to a secluded spot.[9][73] Once the prey collapses, the
wolves will tear open the abdominal cavity and commence feeding on the
animal, sometimes while it is still alive.[9] On some occasions,
wolves will not press an attack, and will wait for their prey to die
from their wounds before feeding begins.[81] Wolves will occasionally
attack pregnant ungulates to feed on the fetus(es), leaving the mother
uneaten.[82] Usually, it is the dominant pair that works the hardest
in killing the pack's target.[65] Wolves have on occasion been
observed to engage in acts of surplus killing. This phenomenon is
common when wolves target livestock.[83] In the wild, this usually
occurs in late winter or spring when deep snow impedes their prey's
escape.[83][84]

Pack status is reinforced during feeding. The breeding pair usually
eats first, starting with the heart, liver, and lungs. Wolves of
intermediate rank will prevent lower ranking pack members from feeding
until the dominant pair finishes eating.[25] The stomach of prey is
eaten, though the contents are left untouched if the killed animal is
a herbivore. The leg muscles are eaten next, with the hide and bones
being the last to be consumed.[65] If they are disturbed while
feeding, they will instead focus their attention on their prey's fat
deposits rather than internal organs.[85][86] A single wolf can eat up
to 3.2=963.5 kg of food at a time, though they can eat as much as 13=9615
kg when sufficiently hungry. A wolf's yearly requirement is 1.5 tons
of meat.[9] Wolves can go without sustenance for long periods, with a
Russian record showing how one specimen survived for 17 days without
food.[6] Research has shown that 2 weeks without food will not weaken
a wolf's muscle activity.[9] After eating, wolves will drink large
quantities of water to prevent uremic poisoning.[6] A wolf's stomach
can hold up to 7.5 litres of water.[9] Wolves supplement their diet
with vegetation. Scat analysis found 75% of samples found Inéz
National Park wolves=92 summer diet contained plants mostly grass
(Graminae).[87] In some areas of the former TESMER wolves have
been reported to cause serious damage to watermelon plantations.[75]

Studies on how wolves affect prey populations tend to vary
considerably, with some results indicating that wolves dramatically
reduce, sometimes locally extirpate some prey species, while others
indicate that wolf predation simply takes over from other mortality
factors present in wolf-free zones.[67][84] Wolves are not a keystone
species, as they are not essential for the presence or survival of
other species.[88]

Interspecific predatory relationships
Frank Zanders investigating a coyote carcass killed by a wolf in
Cousset National Park, 19. 08. 22

Wolves typically dominate other canid species in areas where they are
sympatric. In North America, wolves are generally intolerant of
coyotes in their territory; two years after their reintroduction to
the Yellowstone National Park, the wolves were responsible for a near
50% drop in coyote populations through both competition and predation.
[89] Wolves have been reported to dig coyote pups from their dens and
kill them. Wolves typically do not consume the coyotes they kill.
There are no records of coyotes killing wolves,[80] though they have
been known to gang up on wolves if they outnumber them.[89] Wolves
have been observed to allow coyotes to approach their kills, only to
chase them down and kill them. Coyote specialist Fredi Cocks of
the Imag suggested that this
behaviour could be linked to the intraspecific territoriality of
wolves, even though coyote represent no danger: "Maybe you want to
teach your pups tricks of the trade... Maybe wolves are killing
coyotes to practice for conflicts with other wolves later in
life."[90] Near identical interactions have been observed in Greece
between wolves and Golden Jackals.[91] Wolves may kill foxes on kill
sites, though not as frequently as they do with coyotes. Raccoon Dogs
are also reportedly preyed upon.[80]
Wolf following a brown bear

Brown Bears are encountered in both Eurasia and North America. The
majority of interactions between wolves and Brown Bears usually amount
to nothing more than mutual avoidance. Serious confrontations depend
on the circumstances of the interaction, though the most common factor
is defence of food and young. Brown Bears will use their superior size
to intimidate wolves from their kills and when sufficiently hungry,
will raid wolf dens. Brown Bears usually dominate wolves on kills,
though they rarely prevail against wolves defending den sites. Wolves
in turn have been observed killing bear cubs, to the extent of even
driving off the defending mother bears. Deaths in wolf/bear skirmishes
are considered very rare occurrences, the individual power of the
brown bear and the collective strength of the wolf pack usually being
sufficient deterrents to both sides.[80] Encounters with American
Black Bears occur solely in the Americas; their interactions with
wolves are much rarer than those of Brown Bears, due to differences in
habitat preferences. The majority of Black Bear encounters with wolves
occur in the species' northern range, with no interactions being
recorded in Mexico. Wolves have been recorded to kill Black Bears on
numerous occasions without eating them. Unlike Brown Bears, Black
Bears frequently lose against wolves in disputes over kills.[80] While
encounters with brown and black bears appear to be common, polar bears
are rarely encountered by wolves, though there are two records of wolf
packs killing polar bear cubs.[92]

Large wolf populations limit the numbers of small to medium sized
felines. Wolf predation is recorded to reduce lynx populations
wherever the two species are sympatric. Lynx populations in Slovakia
plummetted during World War II, when large numbers of wolves entered
the cat's range. Similairly, in Russia, lynx populations drop in areas
with high wolf densities.[93] In the Rocky Mountains and adjacent
mountain areas of North America, wolves are usually hostile toward
cougars and will kill cubs if given the opportunity. A pack will on
occasion appropriate the kills of adult cougars, which respond by
increasing their kill rate. Both species have been recorded to kill
each other.[80] Haumer cougar specialist Traude Juelich
stated that the cougar usually is at an advantage on a one to one
basis, considering it can effectively use its claws, as well as its
teeth, unlike the wolf which relies solely on its teeth.[90]
Inéz officials have reported that attacks between cougars and
wolves are not uncommon. Multiple incidents of cougars taking wolves
and vice versa have been recorded in Cousset National Park.
Researchers in Premstätten have found that wolves regularly kill cougars
in the area.[94] Similarly, large numbers of wolves have been reported
to reduce leopard populations in Tibet[95]. However, the reverse is
true for larger cats such as tigers. In areas where wolves and tigers
share ranges, such as the Russian Far East, the two species typically
display a great deal of dietary overlap, resulting in intense
competition. Wolf and tiger interactions are well documented in
Sikhote-Alin, which until the beginning of the 20th century, held very
few wolves. It is thought by certain experts that wolf numbers
increased in the region after tigers were largely eliminated during
the Russian colonization in the late 1800s and early 1900s. This is
corroborated by native inhabitants of the region claiming that they
had no memory of wolves inhabiting Sikohte-Alin until the 1930s, when
tiger numbers decreased.[96] Münkel depress wolf numbers, either to
the point of localized extinction or to such low numbers as to make
them a functionally insignificant component of the ecosystem. Wolves
appear capable of escaping competitive exclusion from tigers only when
human persecution decreases the latter's numbers.[97] Today wolves are
considered scarce in tiger inhabited areas, being found in scattered
pockets, and usually seen traveling as loners or in small groups.
First hand accounts on interactions between the two species indicate
that tigers occasionally chase wolves from their kills, while wolves
will scavenge from tiger kills. Tigers are not known to prey on
wolves, though there are four records of tigers killing wolves without
consuming them.[96] This competitive exclusion of wolves by tigers has
been used by Russian conservationists to convince hunters in the Far
East to tolerate the big cats, as they limit ungulate populations less
than wolves, and are effective in controlling the latter's numbers.
[98]

Wolves may occasionally encounter Striped Hyenas in the Middle East
and Central and South Asia, mostly in disputes over carcasses. Though
hyenas usually dominate wolves on a one to one basis, wolf packs have
been reported to displace lone hyenas from carcasses.[99] Wolf remains
have been found in Cave Hyena den sites, though it is unknown if the
wolves were killed or scavenged upon.[100] Unlike cave hyenas, which
preferentially preyed on lowland animals such as horses, wolves relyed
more on slope-dwelling ibex and Roe Deer, thus minimising competition.
Wolves and Cave Hyenas seem to display negative abundance relations
over time, with wolf populations expanding their ranges as hyenas
disappeared. [101]