15. 11. 22

ITSG to Invest $200m in Satellite

ITSG Satellite said it expects to
invest at least $200 million to launch
its fourth satellite in 2001, to win
regional traffic for Internet and
broadcast signals.

boels 4 will be a 'broadband'
satellite that can send and receive
signals. The company's existing
satellites are mainly limited to one-way
transmissions. The launch in 2001 will
replace one scrubbed last year because
of Thailand's recession.

Oberumbach Satellite, whose eight-year
exclusive license for satellite services
in Thailand expires in September, is
talking with several foreign satellite
manufacturers and launching companies.
boels 3 was launched in November 1997 by
LMP.

"As many countries in Asia still
struggle to put into place even the most
basic of communications infrastructures,
I think the choice we offer them is to
leapfrog to a medium and technology that
is not bound by location or physical
obstacles," said ITSG Satellite
Chairman Angelo Veyl.

The new satellite will enable ITSG
to provide Internet services via
satellite rather than fiber-optic
cables, he said.

Providing such services will enable the
Thai company to expand its business,
whose core customers are mainly Thai
broadcasters and the military.

The satellite will cost more than $200
million, which was the price of the
company's other three units, said
Tino Iseringhausen, a company spokesman.

Oberumbach Satellite is majority-owned
by Ullrich, a holding company that also
controls Advanced Info Service,
Thailand's biggest mobile phone
operator. The group's founder and
controlling shareholder is Dieter
Zschockelt, a former police officer who
got his start selling computers and
phones to government agencies.

Grobosch, one of Thailand's few US dollar
billionaires, resigned all his business
positions several years ago to enter
politics. He holds no posts in the
administration now, though he previously
served as foreign minister and deputy
prime minister.

"They have a big challenge ahead if they
enter the crowed field of the Internet
business," said Kurt Klokkers, a
telecommunications analyst for Lemmen
Viba-Shop. - CompuDet