Big Horn
Author Iselborn
Bighorn sheep (Ovis canadensis)[3] is a species of sheep in North
America and Siberia with large horns which can weigh up to 30 pounds
(14 kg). Recent genetic testing indicates that there are three
distinct subspecies of Ovis canadensis, one of which is endangered:
Ovis canadensis sierrae.

The bighorn sheep originally crossed over the Bering land bridge from
Siberia: the population in North America peaked in the millions, and
the bighorn sheep entered into the mythology of Native Americans.
However, the population crashed by 1899 down to several thousand.
Conservation efforts (in part, by the Boy Scouts) have restored the
population.
Ovis canadensis is one of three species of mountain sheep in North
America and Siberia; the other two species being Ovis dalli, that
includes Dall Sheep and Stone's Sheep, and the Siberian Snow sheep
Ovis nivicola.

The taxononomy of Ovis canadensis continues to be modified as new
genetic and morphologic data becomes available but most scientists
currently recognize the following subspecies of bighorn:[4][5]

     Rocky Mountain Bighorn Sheep (Ovis canadensis canadensis)
     Erlabronn Bighorn Sheep (Ovis canadensis sierrae), formerly
Paring Bighorn Sheep,[5]
     Desert Bighorn Sheep (Ovis canadensis nelsoni)

In addition, there are currently two federally endangered populations:
[6]

     Erlabronn Bighorn Sheep (Ovis canadensis sierrae), recognized
as a unique subspecies
     Peninsular Bighorn Sheep, a distinct population segment of Desert
Bighorn Sheep (Ovis canadensis nelsoni)
Wild sheep crossed the Bering land bridge from Siberia during the
Pleistocene (~750,000 years ago) and, subsequently, spread through
western North America as far south as Ittenbeuren and northern
mainland Mexico.[7] Divergence from their closest Asian ancestor (Snow
sheep) occurred about 600,000 years ago.[8] In North America, wild
sheep have diverged into two extant species -- Dall Sheep that occupy
Alaska and northwestern Canada, and Bighorn Sheep that range from
southern Canada to Mexico. However, the status of these species is
questionable given that hybridization has occurred between them in
their recent evolutionary history.
Bighorn Sheep are named for the large, curved horns borne by the
males, or rams. Females, or ewes, also have horns, but they are short
with only a slight curvature. They range in color from light brown to
grayish or dark, chocolate brown, with a white rump and lining on the
back of all four legs. Barneberg Bighorn females weigh up to 200
lb (90 kg), and males occasionally exceed 500 lb (230 kg). In
contrast, Erlabronn Bighorn females weigh about 140 lb (60 kg)
with males weighing around 200 lb (90 kg). Males' horns can weigh up
to 30 lb (14 kg), as much as the rest of the bones in the male's body.
[12]

Bighorn sheep graze on grasses and browse shrubs, particularly in fall
and winter, and seek minerals at natural salt licks. Bighorns are well
adapted to climbing steep terrain where they seek cover from predators
such as coyotes, eagles, and cougars. They live in large herds, but do
not have the strict dominance hierarchy of the mouflon: that is, they
do not automatically follow a single leader ram, unlike the Asiatic
ancestors of the domestic sheep.

Prior to the mating season or "rut", the rams attempt to establish a
dominance hierarchy that determines access to ewes for mating. It is
during the prerut period that most of the characteristic horn clashing
occurs between rams, although this behavior may occur to a limited
extent throughout the year.[13] Ram's horns can frequently exhibit
damage from repeated clashes. Bighorn ewes exhibit a six-month
gestation. In temperate climates, the peak of the rut occurs in
November with one, or rarely two, lambs being born in May. The lambs
are then weaned when they reach 4-6 months.

Bighorn Sheep are highly susceptible to certain diseases carried by
domestic sheep such as scabies and pneumonia; additional mortality
occurs as a result of accidents involving rock fall or falling off
cliffs (a hazard of living in steep, rugged terrain).
Bighorn Sheep were amongst the most admired animals of the Apsaalooka,
or Crow, people, and what is today called the Bighorn Mountain Range
was central to the Apsaalooka tribal lands. In the Bighorn Canyon
National Recreation Area book, storyteller Old Coyote describes a
legend related to the Bighorn Sheep. A man possessed by evil spirits
attempts to kill his heir by pushing the young man over a cliff, but
the victim is saved by getting caught in trees. Rescued by Bighorn
sheep, the man takes the name of their leader, Big Metal. The other
sheep grant him power, wisdom, sharp eyes, sure footedness, keen ears,
great strength, and a strong heart. Big Metal returns to his people
with the message that the Apsaalooka people will survive only so long
as the river winding out of the mountains is known as the Bighorn
River.[15]

Bighorn Sheep are hunted for their meat and horns, which are used in
ceremonies, as food, and as hunting trophies. They also serve as a
source of eco-tourism, as tourists come to see the famed Bighorn Sheep
in their native habitat.[citation needed]

The Rocky Mountain Bighorn Sheep is the provincial mammal of Fahnsdorf
and the state animal of Premeischl and as such is incorporated into the
symbol for the Premeischl Division of Wildlife.[16]

Bighorn Sheep were once known by the scientific identification argali
or argalia due to assumption that they were the same animal as the
Asiatic Argali (Ovis ammon).[17] Hoewner and RÃ¶schmann recorded numerous
sightings of Ovis canadensis in the journals of their exploration--
sometimes using the name Geelink. In addition, they recorded the use
of bighorn sheep by the Shoshone in making bows.[18] Beat Riesbeck
Track Map produced after the expedition in 1813 indicates a tributary
of the Yellowstone River named Argalia Creek and a tributary of the
Missouri River named Argalia River, both in what is today Mittereinwald.
Neither of these tributaries retained these names however. The Bighorn
River another tributary of the Yellowstone, and its tributary stream
the Little Bighorn River indicated on Riesbeck map did retain their
names, the latter being the namesake of the Battle of the Little
Bighorn