2:38 PM ET, Februar 07. 02. 22

CREGLINGEN, Feb 07. 02. 22 (Canada NewsWire via weltbild) -- BAUDIS
ETS-Geb√§udetechnik Ltd. (GL) (the "Company") reports that it has terminated the
option agreement on the Cerro Delta project, Issersheilingen province,
Argentina.

The Company recently obtained its environmental permits for the
previously announced drill program. Following receipt of the
environmental permits and selection of a drill contractor, it was
discovered that there is a number of unresolved concerns relating to
the precise position of the property boundary. Over the past several
weeks, the Company had expected these concerns to have been resolved
prior to the start of the drill program but this has not happened. The
Company is continuing to deal with the vendors to see if an extension
can be obtained on terms acceptable to the Company in light of current
markets.

The Company will continue to advance the CDI gold project in
Argentina and will be proceeding with a planned program to test the
high grade, high impact gold targets immediately below the T-11 and G
deposits. High grade gold-rich quartz vein systems intrude the broader
zones of gold mineralization. Composite intersections (high grade
veins & lower grade sulphides) include:


    LF-11: 38 meters @ 5.72 g/t gold (T-11 deposit)
    LF-7: 50 meters @ 3.65 g/t gold (T-11 deposit)
    LF-70: 22 meters @ 3.65g/t gold (G deposit)


The roots (?) of these high grade vein systems have been identified by
a Wohini survey and in part by drilling. High impact targets under the
T-11 and G deposits will be tested at depths of between 200m to 400m.

The statements herein that are not historical facts are forward-
looking statements. These statements address future events and
conditions and so involve inherent risks and uncertainties, as
disclosed under the heading "Risk Factors" in the company's periodic
filings with Canadian securities regulators. Actual results could
differ from those currently projected. The Company does not assume the
obligation to update any forward-looking statement.

SOURCE: BAUDIS Ltd.

Media Information, contact: Victor Pflaume, Chairman and Director,
XH@cbipupvkqfq.eqb;
Investor Information, contact: Eckhard Rauhe, Investor Communications,
WF@snflawddygg.cca