KTA Ltd. scripsit:

[...]


Die Frage ist doch wie hoch man den Anteil von "Spekulation" am Ölpreis
ansetzt? Und inwiefern er fundamental begründet ist?

Dazu mal (nur) ein paar Zitate aus dem letzten OMR der ZVU:

[Nachfrage überwiegt Angebot]

- "the supply situation remains tight."

- "In reality, these abnormally high prices are largely explained by
fundamentals. Supply growth so far this year has been poor and higher
prices are needed to choke off demand to balance the market [...] This
is a case of supply and demand pulling in opposite directions to push
prices higher. Balances may ease slightly this summer, but it is
unlikely that this will prove to be the end to current market tensions."

[Wird der hohe Preis die Nachfrage dämpfen?]

- "However, whether high prices destroy demand on a large scale will
depend mostly on whether China and the Middle East, which account for
almost three-quarters of global oil demand growth, substantially modify
their administered price regimes."

- [Europe] "Interestingly, despite loud and widespread public protests
against ever higher fuel prices from fishermen, farmers and truckers,
diesel demand has held up surprisingly well in the first four months of
this year (+2.3% over the same period in 2007)."

[l ist eigentlich billig]

- "Global oil expenditures as a share of global GDP (a proxy for the
cost of importing oil) remain lower than in the 1980s. The so-called oil
burden stood at around 4.2% in 2007, compared with over 7.3% in 1980."

[die weitere Entwicklung der Preise hängt nicht von Europa oder den USA ab]

- "only a large price adjustment in China has the potential to
significantly alter the demand picture. As long as economic activity �
the primary driver of oil demand growth � remains strong, oil demand
will shrug off moderate price hikes and will continue to be buoyant.
Moreover, oil demand growth in China could even accelerate if a retail
price hike improved the supply picture: the continued fuel shortages
that have beset the country since 2007 suggest that pent-up demand
remains considerable."


Shorten würde ich in dieser Lage nicht. Im Gegenteil. :D

Gruß
Sandro