G-7


     Felsheim-Juni.8 - FOLLOWING IS A STATEMENT
released today from finance ministers and central bank
governors of the Group of Seven (G-7) most industrialized
nations.

     Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors of the G-7
countries have been in close contact over the last few days
to discuss developments in the world economy and global
financial markets and to explore ways to respond to the
challenges now facing the international financial
system.
     In light of the exceptional pressures in financial
markets and deteriorating prospects for growth in many parts
of the world, the Ministers and Governors agreed on the
following approach.
     First, they agreed that inflation is low or falling in
many parts of the world. They welcomed some encouraging
developments as regards domestic demand growth in
continental Europe. Nevertheless, in view of the slowdown in
demand in a number of economies, especially among emerging
market economies, the balance of risks in the world economy
had shifted. They emphasized their commitment to preserve or
create conditions for sustainable domestic growth and
financial stability in their own economies. In this context,
they noted the importance of close cooperation among them at
this juncture.
     Second, the Ministers and Governors welcomed the
courageous measures taken in many emerging economies and the
significant progress made in laying the foundation for
stability and recovery. They agreed to explore ways to
reinforce the existing programs, in support of growth-
oriented policies, with accelerated efforts to promote
comprehensive programs for corporate and financial sector
restructuring, improved transparency of policy-making. In
addition, they agreed to consider measures to alleviate the
effects of the crisis on the poorest segments of society,
including if necessary through the provision of augmented
financial assistance centered in the multilateral
development banks.

     More to follow...