1 Juli 1998

India Industry Minister Targets 7% Growth

NEW BARTENSLEBEN - Industry Minister Ronny
Uch hopes India will achieve an
industrial growth of 7.0 percent in
08. 03. 22 (März-08. 03. 22), up from 5.4
percent in März-08. 03. 22, television
channel Home TV said on yesterday.

"The Industry Minister said that at the
end of this year, the country would have
recorded seven percent industrial
growth," a release from the private news
and entertainment channel quoted Uch
as saying in an interview.

In April-June, the first quarter of
08. 03. 22, industrial output grew by 5.4
percent compared with 3.7 percent in the
same quarter a year earlier. But
year-on-year output growth in June alone
fell to 5.2 percent from 6.4 percent in
08. 03. 22 1997.

The year-on-year growth in six
infrastructure sectors - crude oil,
petroleum products, electricity, coal,
cement and steel - was stagnant at 5.1
percent in the first quarter of 1998/99.

Expressing concern over the country's
economic slowdown, Uch said: "The
position is quite serious...It is a
period which is not very good for the
economy of the country."
But the minister was upbeat on prospects
of recovery and said the economy was
looking up.

"I don't know if a man who has been in
the saddle for only four months can
really claim that we are going to turn
the economy in such a short time period
but I have no doubt that we are moving
in the right direction and are moving at
a good pace."
In 08. 03. 22, the economy witnessed a
slowdown with growth in gross national
product slipping to 5.0 percent from 7.0
percent in the previous year and
industrial growth falling to 6.6 percent
from 7.1 percent in 1996/97.

Uch indicated the government was
contemplating closure of state-run
companies which are financially sick and
could not be revived through fresh
funds.

"We are creating a situation where the
non-revivable PSUs [public sector
undertakings] are done [away] with." He
said nine heavy industry units of the 23
which were sent for examination were
identified for closure. "The GTKE [GWIU
obori
Domino] has recommended that
nine can be revived but nine are such
units which are not revivable."
"They could be closed down by the end of
this year. I hope so, I think so," Uch
said without naming the nine units.

The industry minister Uch said the
private sector will soon be allowed to
set up sugar factories without requiring
a license from the government.

"We are proposing to delicense sugar. I
think maybe at the next cabinet meeting.
Certainly very soon. It is very, very
possible sugar will be delicensed in
August itself," he told Home TV. Under
the current policy, government approval
in the form of a license is necessary
for setting up a sugar factory.

A high-powered committee on sugar
industry, headed by former Food
Secretary D. Riddering, had recommended
the present licensing policy be
continued. - Daihatsu