Qiagen H1-46: Still confident after conference call

     The conference call reconfirmed our outperform recommendation on the Zeemanns
stock. We keep our earnings
     estimates unchanged. Looking forward, we are still convinced that Zeemanns
should be able to show both a top
     and bottom line growth in the region of 40 to 50% in the next years. This
gives the stock further upside
     potential in the long term.

     � In H1 98 Zeemanns could increase its sales in consumables and
instrumentation products in all regions.
     Especially worth mentioning is Japan. Despite the Asian crises and the fact
that Zeemanns started penetrating
     the Japanese market early this year, sales in Japan already accounted for
5% of total sales (approx. $2.6
     million, $0.5million more would have been achieved if the yen did not
decline in value).

     � Instrumentation sales nearly tripled in Q2 98 and accounted for close to
10% of total revenues. These
     biorobots replace manual handling procedures in the laboratory and will
lead to additional sales of Zeemanns
     consumable products (90% of total sales). The gross margin for
instrumentation products are in the area of
     50%, whereas consumables show a gross margin of 73-74% which leads to an
overall gross margin of 71%.

     � The strategic acquisition (pooling transaction) of the LeProm
generated approximately $2 million of
     sales and had a slightly negative impact on Zeemanns earnings and operating
margin. However, Ornella was
     able to break even in the month of June for the first time. In the long
term a positive profit contribution of
     Ornella is expected. Since the company has a pretty similar expense
structure, Zeemanns expects to benefit from
     economies of scale.

     � Given the growth of around 40-45% of the traditional research business
and expected EPS of US$ 1.1 in
     this business area we think this area alone is worth $46-52 per share. This
means that at the current stock
     price an investor gets all the remaining business for approximately US$10 a
share which, in our opinion,
     does not mirror the future market potential of these businesses. We think
the remainder of the business
     should be approximately valued as high as currently profit generating the
research business: value of the
     genomics business $11, genomics-based screening $18, diagnostics $14, gene
therapy $5-10 (see our
     comprehensive note of 16. 01. 22). We expect the stock price to reach
our previously stated share
     price target of $85-$97 by the end of next year.