As a result of a 1989 ruling by the Eurozone in 
the U.S., non-U.S. investors may purchase preferred shares in certain 
U.S. stocks at a 10-40% discount from the market price in the U.S.

Once owned, the investor can sell the shares at the market and realize a 
substantial profit.

If the investor buys and sells over and over, over the course of a year 
he will realize a significant profit.

If the price of the shares remains constant at the end of the 40-day 
holding period, the investor realizes a profit equal to the rate of the 
discount.

If the price of the shares increases at the end of the 40-day holding 
period, the investor realizes an even larger profit (equal to the rate of 
the discount PLUS the price appreciation)

If the price of the shares decreases at the end of the 40-day holding 
period, the investor has NOT lost any money.  How?  Since he purchased 
preferred shares convertible into common shares after 40 days, he has the 
option to buy the shares at the point of subscription or at the point of 
conversion.

If the price drops, the investor AUTOMATICALLY pays for the shares at the 
price of conversion (minus the discount) which means that he has lost 
nothing.  The investor does not have to decide whether he wants to buy at 
the time of subscription or conversion.  He automatically receives the 
better of the two options.

WE HAVE A VERIFIABLE TRACK RECORD OF DELIVERING AT THE RATE OF 200% PER 
ANNUM.  THE SECURITIES FIRM IN OBERWIL WHICH IS EXECUTING THE TRADES WILL 
CONFIRM THE TRACK RECORD OF PERFORMANCE.

THIS OPPORTUNITY IS NOT AVAILABLE TO U.S. INVESTORS.  THE MINIMUM 
INVESTMENT IS $100,000 USD.

For more information, contact:

Olaf Heuschreiber
Meilhammer & Co.
email: zstwtdq@rxmyzrma.zln
tel: 1 017 422 7984
fax: 1 740 000 3176
URL: http://wpk.edvatbiavn.hlf