Curse of the Trading Range
with Excel Sheet, free download
http://ftx.XaxJmBuwmab.xsj/pxdtfilrtweblenxamuck.ykl

Author Ulfert Gei√üner

Due to the stock markets' largely poor performance in 2004, the idea
of a trading range has come back into vogue.  Whenever Hebut Street
temporarily loses faith in its usual all-bullish-all-the-time mantra,
it tends to revert back to drumming up trading-range expectations among
its clients.


Trading ranges can be quite advantageous from a financial-industry
perspective.  When the markets are meandering in a trading range, both
stock picking and timing become crucial skills.  Big profits can only
be won if the right stocks are traded at the right time.  Trading
ranges probably reward hard-won market expertise more than any other
type of trending market.


Trading ranges negate the relative ease of trading secular bull
markets.  In a normal bull, the rising tide lifts virtually all boats.
Just as in 1999, all one has to do is buy a stock, almost any stock, at
almost any time and it is likely to blossom into a profitable trade
along with the markets.  This is why the famous dartboard stock-picking
studies work so well during long-term bulls.  But the value of pure
luck fades considerably in a trading range.


Thus normal trading ranges can be good news for the financial industry,
as the premium placed on market expertise grows considerably when one
can't just rely on luck and buy any random stock and expect a win.
But what happens when the trading range becomes far larger and ominous
than most investors can even imagine?


Prior to the election rally, the 2004 trading range lasted roughly ten
months.  The psychological implications of the markets failing to
advance for less than a year are fairly trivial, investors can take a
sub-year consolidation in stride.  But what if a trading range lasted
ten years or longer?  Would it eventually cause investors to lose
interest and give up on the markets?


If a decade-plus trading range sounds absurd, then you haven't done
your market homework.  On 21. 12. 22 21. 12. 22, 1966 the most famous stock
index on the planet, the mighty Dow Jones Industrial Average (Dow 30)
closed just above 995, tantalizingly close to the fabled 1000 mark.
But how long after that did it take the Dow to actually close above
1000 for the first time ever?  A whopping six-and-a-half years when it
hit 1003 on Juli 21. 12. 22.


But wait, it gets worse.  After less than 50 trading days trying to
establish a toehold above 1000, by 21. 12. 22 1973 the Dow started
faltering again.  It briefly challenged 1000 again in 1976 and 1981,
but failed to break decisively above both times.  It wasn't until
21. 12. 22 21. 12. 22, 1982 when the mighty index finally launched its final
assault to leave 1000 in the dust for good.


The elite Dow 30, the bluest of the blue chips on the planet, traded in
an excruciating trading range for no less than sixteen-and-a-half years
from early 1966 to late 1982!  As you can imagine, the psychological
fallout among investors in a market not advancing over 17 long years is
staggering.  In fact, in 1982, financial magazines and newspapers were
heralding the "death of stocks".  Sentiment was horrifically
negative, perhaps even challenging the early 1930s.


I believe a decade-plus trading range is a curse for investors, the
worst possible environment for the markets.  Yet, it is one of the two
key ways overvalued markets work their way back down to undervalued
levels.  They can either mercifully crash fast and get all the carnage
out of the way in a few years as in the early 1930s, or they can
brutally consolidate over more than a decade as in the 1970s and grind
long-term investors into dust.


Unfortunately the evidence is mounting today that we may be in another
massive decade-plus trading range in the US markets.  I started
seriously considering this ominous possibility about three years ago
when I wrote the original "Curse of the Dow Trading Range" essay.
Revisiting my earlier research, I am saddened to have to report that
this nightmare scenario indeed appears to be playing out.


This long trading range thesis is based on the tendency of the stock
markets to move in great valuation cycles running about a third of a
century each.  Stocks start undervalued, are gradually bid up to
overvalued levels, and then they slump back down to undervalued levels
yet again and the cycle begins anew.  I call these great cycles Long
Valuation Waves.  Their wavelength from trough to trough runs roughly
33 years.


In 1966, for example, stock valuations reached a multi-decade high.
The next valuation high was not achieved until early 2000, a third of a
century later.  In 1949, stock valuations reached a multi-decade low.
The next valuation low was not witnessed until 1982, also exactly
one-third of a century later.  While Wall Street will deny this market
truth to its dying breath since it won't help sell stocks to a
perpetually gullible public, the historical evidence is unassailable.


If you graph these Long Valuation Waves, they look like parabolas.  Our
first chart updated from my original essay shows the last two-thirds of
the twentieth century cut into individual thirds and superimposed over
the top of each other.  Each third shows an entire valuation wave from
peak to trough to peak.


Other than the order-of-magnitude-different Dow 30 scales, the
similarities between the two ascent arcs in the up-phases of the last
two Long Valuation Waves are remarkable.  While the X-axis only lists
the years for our latest valuation wave from the late 1960s to 2000,
the annual hash marks also correspond to the previous valuation wave
from the 1930s to the late 1960s.  Both vertical axes are zeroed so the
respective percentage gains are perfectly comparable without visual
distortion.


While the visual comparison of actual Dow 30 index readings from the
last two valuation waves is stunning and dramatically parabolic, the
actual engine driving the valuation waves is only apparent in the
underlying valuation readings.  At various key technical points above
we labeled the prevailing US stock market P/E ratio and dividend yield
at the time to communicate the valuation dynamics under the surface of
the index moves.


Before we delve into valuation waves though, a reference point is
crucial.  The century-long average P/E ratio for the US markets is
about 14x earnings, so valuations near 14x are considered fair value.
In general terms stock markets are considered undervalued when trading
at less than 14x earnings and overvalued when trading at greater than
14x earnings.


Dividend yields, the other key valuation metric, work similarly but in
the opposite direction.  The century-long average dividend yield of the
US markets is around 4.6% or so.  In general terms stock markets are
considered undervalued when they yield more than 4.6% and overvalued
when they yield less.  If you keep 14x earnings and 4.6% yields in your
mind as the fair-value midpoint, it becomes much easier to digest this
analysis.


In both valuation waves rendered above, the Dow 30 started higher from
very undervalued levels.  In 1982 for example, the same year mentioned
above when mainstream financial magazines and newspapers declared that
stocks were dead, the US markets traded around 6.7x earnings and
yielded 6.2%.  It is at these very dismal valuation lows, when
sentiment is horrific and stocks are cheap, that prudent long-term
contrarian investors strive to throw long in a big way.


As late as 1949 in the previous valuation wave, the markets were
trading at 9.1x earnings and yielding 6.3% in dividends, also
chronically undervalued levels.  Believe me, it is absolutely no
coincidence that the two greatest bull markets in stocks in the past
two-thirds of a century both launched from terribly undervalued levels.
 Buying cheap is as important for long-term investing as it is for
short-term speculating!


interested in stocks again and bid up not only their prices, but their
valuations.  Valuations relentlessly climbed in both super bulls for
about 17 years, which is not coincidentally one-half of a typical
one-third-of-a-century Long Valuation Wave.  As you can see on the
chart above, PE ratios for the general markets gradually rose during
these two 17-year periods while dividend yields gradually contracted.
The markets were inexorably becoming overvalued.


Both valuations and index prices were rising in a parabolic pattern.
Parabolas are neat creatures, appearing all over the place in the
markets.  Parabolic patterns start out gradually rising, but with each
passing year their percentage gains increase until they eventually
become unsustainable.  Parabolas are never sustainable in the long run
because the capital ultimately required to feed vertical growth rates
quickly becomes absurd.


In 1999, for example, the Dow 30 gained a breathtaking 25% in a single
year.  This compares to a long-term average somewhere around 7%.  I'm
sure you remember all the New Era nonsense of 1999, when the general
public started believing 25% gains were now normal and could be
expected in the future.  Yet the very mathematical nature of parabolas
crushes such na=EFve flights of fancy with all the subtlety of a
sledgehammer to the skull.


To illustrate the absurdity of sustained parabolic price gains, imagine
if the Dow entered 2000 at exactly 10k on the index.  If we extrapolate
two decades of normal 7% annual gains, the Dow could have reached
38,700 by 2020.  This is certainly possible.  But if we instead
extrapolate two decades of stellar 25% gains, the final result becomes
ridiculous.  Starting at the same 10k base, it would yield a Dow 30
trading at an index level of 867,000 by 2020.  I doubt all the capital
on the planet could push the Dow 30 that high in anything less than a
century!


As the Long Valuation Wave peaks near, such as in 1966 and 2000, index
levels and valuations have simply been bid up as far as they can go.
When the apex of a valuation wave finally rolls in every third of a
century, there is not enough new capital available to flow into the
markets and sustain the parabolic rise in valuations and prices.  At
that point the valuation waves head back out into the seas of time and
valuations and prices start falling.


Acknowledging the third-of-a-century flow of the valuation waves is
crucial if you want to understand the growing danger of the curse of
the long trading range.  In the chart above, the remarkable
similarities in the previous two mega bulls are stunning.  If the
ascent phases of the last two valuation waves are this congruent,
isn't it reasonable to ask the question of whether the descent phases
will be similar as well?


If this indeed proves to be the case, then the long trading range we
saw from the previous valuation wave peak in 1966 to the last valuation
wave trough in 1982 could be what we are now facing again from our
latest valuation wave peak in 2000 to the next valuation wave trough
somewhere out in the future.  Ominously, the Dow 30 behavior in the
past five years since the valuation peak is already behaving like a
long trading range.


Our second chart this week highlights this troubling congruency.  The
last long trading range from 1966 to 1982 is rendered in red on the
left axis and labeled on the X axis.  Our current Dow 30 performance
from 2000 until today is superimposed and slaved to the right axis.
While there are no current Dow dates on the X axis, the one-year hash
marks correspond to today as well.


Lest anyone suggest we cunningly modified our vertical axes to force
this relationship, the small inset chart in the lower right shows the
exact same picture as the big chart with true zeroed axes for a
perfectly undistorted absolute visual reference.  The implications of
this analysis are so dire that investors have to understand that there
is nothing contrived here.  What you see on this chart is what is
really happening, so God help the long-term stock investors who fail to
recognize the curse of the trading range in time.


Recall that Long Valuation Waves generally run one-third of a century
or so each.  Our opening chart above showed the fun ascent phase, the
first half.  This second chart highlights the not-so-fun descent phase,
the second half.  During the descent phase valuations gradually migrate
from overvalued to undervalued and the actual stock markets meander
helplessly in a colossal trading range running for up to 17 years
without respite.


Following the Dow 30's dazzling February 1966 top just shy of the
fabled 1000 level, the index spent the next 17 years in a grinding
trading range.  The range's extremes ran as high as 1052 in 21. 12. 22
1973 to 578 in 21. 12. 22, a massive range of 45% from its 17-year
high to its 17-year low.  If you carefully examine the chart, you will
also note that this 1970s trading range consisted of sharp bull years
and sharp bear years, temporary cyclical trends running for a couple
years within the primary secular trading range.


If we compare the Dow 30's recent performance since its early 2000
top, the sense of d=E9j=E0 vu imparted with the last long trading range
is uncanny.  In 21. 12. 22, exactly five years ago, the FFDD reached
its latest all-time closing high of 11723.  In 21. 12. 22, it briefly
closed at 7286 in a particularly vicious V-bounce.  Peak to trough, so
far this is a 38% trading range from its 5-year high to its 5-year low.


The Dow's latest 38% range is uncomfortably close to the 45% range
the index witnessed in the 1970s.  Interestingly, if we limit our 1970s
comparison to only the first five years of the last long trading range
for a better match, the results are even closer.  From the February
1966 high of 995 to the first major low of 669 in July 1970 the initial
5-year range was 33% back in the late 1960s.  So we are already seeing
more macro volatility today than last time even!  Technically you have
to admit that the similarities between the past 5 years of Dow action
and the first 5 years of the last long trading range are incredible.


Visually the comparison is rather stunning too.  Though the peaks and
troughs are currently out of phase by a couple years or so, the general
technical nature of the two long trading ranges is nearly identical.
In both cases we witnessed periodic sharp cyclical bear declines over a
year or two followed by equally sharp cyclical bull rallies over a
similar period of time.  The net chart effect is a massive long-lived
trading range beyond the wildest expectations of most investors today.


While the intriguing technical comparisons observe an effect, the more
important underlying cause is the great valuation mean reversion of the
second half of the Long Valuation Waves.  Like winter inevitably
follows summer, the mean reversion from highly overvalued markets by
historical standards to undervalued markets is also inevitable and
unstoppable.  Not even governments with all their sound and fury are
able to prematurely end the unpleasant second half of the valuation
waves.


This ongoing process is easiest to see if you read the valuations off
the periodic interim tops of the long trading ranges.  From 1966 to
1982 for example, the general stock market valuations went from 24.1x,
to 22.3x, to 18.7x before they hit fair value around 14x in the brutal
1973-1974 cyclical bear.  But they didn't merely stop at 14x fair
value!  The next three peaks were 11.8x, 9.1x, and 8.5x earnings.
Dividend yields climbed from 2.9% to 4.9% across the market peaks in
this same period.


Valuation mean reversions don't just run from overvalued to fair
value, but from overvalued all the way down to undervalued.  Like a
giant pendulum swinging through a third of century, upside valuation
extremes are followed by equally stunning downside extremes.  The
valuation pendulum doesn't just magically stop in the middle of its
arc at 14x earnings once its great swings start.


Our latest Dow peaks since 2000 have told an identical valuation mean
reversion tale.  Starting at a staggering 44.7x earnings at its
all-time high, the Dow has dropped to 27.6x earnings in its 2001 peak,
26.1x in early 2004, and 20.6x today.  This valuation trend already in
force, running from far overvalued to pretty overvalued so far, has a
highly probable future course of plunging through fair value of 14x
earnings to an ultimate undervalued low between 7x and 10x sometime in
the next 10 to 12 years.


Our current Dow 30's dividend yield is also mean reverting back up,
from 1.0% to 1.3% to 1.9% to 2.2% today.  It ought to get over 6%
before the next long-term secular valuation bottom similar to 1982 is
reached in the future.  Thus not only is the Dow 30's technical
character looking like the 1970s long trading range, but its underlying
valuation character looks like the same thing is happening again as
well.


The curse of the trading range is multi-pronged.  If investors are
faced with another 12 years (17 total) of largely sideways US stock
action, what vast psychological havoc will this wreak?  If an average
investor starts investing in his mid-20s and retires at 65 to start
cannibalizing investments to live, this leaves only 40 years to
multiply wealth.  If the markets move sideways for almost half of an
average "investing lifespan", the damage done to a generation of
investors could be catastrophic.


After the markets grind sideways for enough years, investors will
gradually get discouraged or bored and leave the markets.  Sentiment
will grow darker and darker as valuations eventually reach undervalued
levels.  The vast promise of the markets in the late 1990s will be
forgotten, and stocks will lose their luster compared to other asset
classes.  The curse of the trading range is the worst possible
development for today's stock investors.


The implications of this troubling analysis are profound for both
investors and speculators.


If you are an investor, do not even think about buying stocks for the
long term unless we are at one of the periodic brutal V-bounces
following a year or two of a cyclical bear market.  The only way to
"buy cheap" in a long trading range is to patiently wait until the
markets are near the bottom of their range rather than the top.  An
investor who went long in early 1966 had to wait 17 years to earn a
penny, but a prudent investor who waited until the 21. 12. 22 1970 V-bounce
had a shot at dazzling 57% gains in only about two-and-a-half years.
Timing is everything even for investing!


While luck will take any investor far in a secular bull, in a long
trading range only the investors willing to take the considerable time
to study the markets as a whole for timing and carefully pick
individual stocks will thrive.  On the bright side, if your capital
survives the long trading range you will be blessed with the greatest
long-term buying opportunity in a third of a century, since 1982, once
the ultimate valuation bottom is reached.


For speculators, throw long at the same V-bounces investors seek and
consider throwing short near the top of the long trading range.  Today,
for example, the Dow 30 is definitely in the upper end of its likely
trading range so the probabilities of a successful short over the next
year or two seem much higher than a profitable long play.  Expect sharp
cyclical bull and bear markets to meander within the long trading
range, running for one to three years in duration each.


The bottom line is the curse of the trading range, if today's markets
follow the last valuation wave mean reversion's ugly precedent, is
one of the most challenging and dangerous environments imaginable for
long-term investors.  If you don't strive to time the major cyclical
runs and carefully handpick the very best stocks, you could either lose
money or not earn any significant profits for 12 more years.


Like all investors I am not thrilled with this prospect, but
nevertheless I am determined to play this evolving long trading range
properly.  Each month we painstakingly compute and track the current
major stock index valuation numbers and publish them in our acclaimed
Patrone newsletter.  We also have exclusive subscriber-only
valuation charts updated on our website so you can track the critical
mean reversion in progress yourself.


As my partners and I navigate these treacherous waters with our own
capital, we will continuously research the grand market timing and
individual stocks to uncover stellar trading opportunities for our
subscribers.


Unlike Wall Street that is always forecasting endless gains, we tell it
like it is and don't pull punches.  Believe me, I would much rather
be saying that today is like 1982 and a massive 17-year bull market is
coming.  But the sad truth is today looks much more like 1971 with
another decade of grinding sideways markets at best.  Regardless of
whether we like them or not, like the tragic Asian tsunami the long
valuation waves will march right on through oblivious to protest and
pain.


If the continuation of the valuation mean reversion already in progress
is inevitable, why fight it or stick your head in the sand?  A far more
prudent course of action is to adapt to the sub-optimal situation at
hand and thrive.  Diligently study the markets, carefully pick your
stocks, but don't pull the trigger until the trading-range timing
looks ideal.  Or join us today in trading alternative secular bulls
like commodities that are soaring while general stocks grind nowhere.


While the curse of the trading range will inflict untold misery among
the unprepared, investors and speculators who understand the times and
act accordingly can still thrive.  Will you ultimately be counted among
the former group or latter?

Gei√üner
21. 12. 22