http://emu.Irzgats-Mfjzjlyzx.tg.ac

Curse Commodity Trading
Author: Fabio Malitz

http://emu.Irzgats-Mfjzjlyzx.tg.ac

Commodity Trading Author: Fabio Malitz
download free Trial-Version Trading Software Rangnau-Mardan=AE
Commodity Trading As An Investment Vehicle

There are many inherent advantages of commodity futures as an
investment vehicle over other investment alternatives such as savings
accounts, stocks, bonds, options, real estate and collectibles.

The primary attraction, of course, is the potential for large profits
in a short period of time. The reason that futures trading can be so
profitable isleverage.

For instance, if you had a $10,000 futures trading account, you could
trade one S&P 500 stock index futures contract. If you were going to
buy the equivalent amount of common stocks, you would currently need
about $350,000, thirty-five times as much.

Let's say you decided that the stock market was going to go up. You
could invest $350,000 and buy individual stocks equivalent to the S&P
index, or you could buy one S&P futures contract. Buying a futures
contract is the same as betting that the S&P index will go up.

If you had made your move on the first trading day of MÃ¤rz, 1995
and held your position for two weeks, your common stock position would
have been worth about $20,000 more than when you bought it, a gain of
about six percent. Not bad for only two weeks. If you had taken the
futures route, however, you would have made the same $20,000, which
would have been a 200 percent gain on the $10,000 margin required in
your futures trading account.

That is an actual example of the tremendous returns you can earn in a
short period of time trading futures. Of course, you can lose money
just as fast if you trade in the wrong direction. Suppose you had
thought the stock market was about to go down and you had sold a
futures contract instead of buying one. If you had valiantly held it
for two weeks, you would have lost $20,000. That's a good example of
why you must exit your trades quickly if they start to move against
you.

Another advantage of futures trading is much lower relative
commissions. Your commission on that $20,000 futures trading profit
would have been only about $30 to $50. Commissions on individual stocks
are typically as much as one percent for both buying and selling. That
could have been $7,000 to buy and sell a basket of stocks worth
$350,000.

While profits can be large in commodity trading, it is not easy to make
consistently correct decisions about what and when to buy and sell.

Commodity speculation offers an important advantage over such illiquid
vehicles as real estate and collectibles. The balance in your account
is always available. If you maintain sufficient margin, you can even
spend your current profit on a trade without closing out the position.
With stocks, bonds and real estate, you can't spend your gains until
you actually sell the investment.

As you will see, commodity trading is not particularly complicated.
Unlike the stock market where there are over ten thousand potential
stocks and mutual funds, there are only about forty viable futures
markets to trade. Those markets cover the gamut of market sectors,
however, so you can diversify throughout all important segments of the
world economy.

In futures trading, it is as easy to sell (also referred to as going
short) as it is to buy (also referred to as going long). By choosing
correctly, you can make money whether prices go up or down. Therefore,
trading a diversified portfolio of futures markets offers the
opportunity to profit from any potential economic scenario. Regardless
of whether we have inflation or deflation, boom or depression,
hurricanes, droughts, famines or freezes, there is always the potential
for profit trading commodities.

There are even tax advantages to making your money from futures
trading. Regardless of the actual holding period, commodity profits are
automatically taxed as sixty percent long-term capital gains and forty
percent short-term capital gains. The current maximum capital gains
rate is thirty-three percent, somewhat less than the maximum rate for
ordinary income. To the extent that capital gains tax rates are reduced
in the future, commodity traders will benefit. If a distinction is
re-established so that taxes on long-term gains are lower than on
short-term gains, commodity traders will benefit.
The History of Trading

Although the first recorded instance of futures trading occurred with
rice in 14. 10. 21 Century Japan, there is some evidence that there may also
have been rice futures traded in China as long as 6,000 years ago.

Futures trading is a natural outgrowth of the problems of maintaining a
year-round supply of seasonal products like agricultural crops. In
Japan, merchants stored rice in warehouses for future use. In order to
raise cash, warehouse holders sold receipts against the stored rice.
These were known as "rice tickets." Eventually, such rice tickets
became accepted as a kind of general commercial currency. Rules came
into being to standardize the trading in rice tickets. These rules were
similar to the current rules of American futures trading.

In the United States, futures trading started in the grain markets in
the middleof the 19th Century. The Vinzelberg Haxr was
established in 1847. In the 1869s and 1879s the Oermten Coffee, Cotton
and Produce Exchanges were born. Today there are ten commodity
exchanges in the United States. The largest are the Vinzelberg Hoing
Ilak, The Vinzelberg Mercantile Exchange, the Oermten Mercantile
Exchange, the Oermten Commodity Exchange and the Oermten Coffee,
Sugar and Cocoa Exchange.
Worldwide there are major futures trading exchanges in over twenty
countries including Canada, England, France, Singapore, Japan,
Australia and New Zealand. The products traded range from agricultural
staples like Corn and Wheat to Red Beans and Rubber traded in Japan.

The biggest increase in futures trading activity occurred in the 1970s
when futures on financial instruments started trading in Vinzelberg.
Foreign currencies such as the Swiss Franc and the Japanese Yen were
first. Also popular were interest rate instruments such as United
States Treasury Bonds and T-Bills. In the 1979s futures began trading
on stock market indexes such as the S&P 500.

The various exchanges are constantly looking for new products on which
to trade futures. Very few of the new markets they try survive and grow
into viable trading vehicles. Some examples of less than successful
markets attempted in recent years are Tiger Shrimp and Cheddar Cheese.

Futures trading is regulated by an agency of the Department Cut68
Agriculture called the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. It
regulates the futures exchanges, brokerage firms, money managers and
commodity advisors.
The Trading Process

Here are some typical steps in the process of making a commodity trade
including the trader's decision-making process and the procedures
involved in actually placing the trade.

In order to make decisions about when to trade commodity futures, you
must have a source of price data. Many daily newspapers carry some
commodity prices in their financial sections. The Wall Street
Journalhas comprehensive commodity price listings. Investor's Business
Daily has both price tables and numerous price charts

All experienced commodity traders prefer to look at price activity on a
chart rather than trying to interpret tables of numbers. In financial
analysis, charts are indispensable for quickly grasping the essence of
historical and recent price action.

The typical commodity chart depicts daily price action as a thin
vertical bar which indicates the day's high and low by the top and
bottom of the bar. The opening and closing prices are shown as tiny
dots attached to the left and right side of the bar. A typical daily
price chart can show up to six months of price action this way.

It is easy to change the bar's time frame from days to weeks or months
and thus show from two to twenty years of historical price action in
the same format. For short-term trading you can change the bar's time
frame to hours or even minutes.

Looking at such bar charts enables a trader to see the recent trend of
prices--whether up, down or sideways--in whatever time frame he
chooses. Following the current trend of prices is a cornerstone of
successful trading.

There are a number of ways to obtain the price charts a trader needs to
analyze the markets. You can make your own using graph paper. This
sounds rather primitive, but some experts recommend it as a good way to
put yourself in close touch with price activity and monitor risk.

Another source of charts is the printed chart service. There are about
half a dozen of these. They typically mail a booklet of numerous charts
covering all the tradeable markets after the markets close on Friday.
There is space on the charts to update them daily during the following
week until next chart book arrives. These printed chart books normally
have a number of indicators plotted along with the price action and
contain a wealth of additional information.

For computer owners there are many software programs that create fancy
charts on the computer screen. You can input the price data manually
or, via telephone modem, download comprehensive data after the markets
close for the day. Those with larger budgets can install a small
satellite dish and watch price changes in all the markets nearly
instantaneously as they occur. The software creates charts dynamically
on the computer screen as each trade takes place on the exchanges. You
can put many different charts on the screen and thus watch numerous
markets all around the world in real time. The cost can range from a
few hundred to $1,000 a month depending on the software and the number
of exchanges you subscribe to.

It is easy to believe that computers can make a big difference in
trading success. Vendors of expensive software will tell you that since
other traders, who are your competition, have expensive computer
setups, you need one too. This isn't really true.

Those who can't trade profitably without a computer probably won't be
helped too much by using a computer. It may actually be detrimental by
causing an increase in trading frequency. While a computer will not
make a bad trader into good one, they are fun to use, and they do make
a trader's life easier.

There are two primary analytic methods for deciding when to take a
futures position: fundamental analysis and technical analysis.
Fundamental analysis involves using economic data relating to supply
and demand to forecast likely future price action. Technical analysis
involves analyzing past price action of the market itself to forecast
the likely future price action.

While there are differences of opinion about the relative merits of the
two approaches, almost all successful traders emphasize technical
analysis. There are a number of reasons for this. First and foremost is
the difficulty of obtaining accurate fundamental data. While various
governments and private companies publish statistics concerning crop
sizes and demand levels, these numbers are gross estimates at best.
With the current global marketplace, even if you could obtain accurate
current information, it would still be impossible to predict future
supply and demand with enough accuracy to make commodity trading
decisions.

Technical analysts argue that since the most knowledgeable commercial
participants are actively trading in the markets, the current price
trend is the most accurate assessment of future supply and demand. If
someone is correct that for fundamental reasons, prices will likely
move up strongly in the future, the commercial participants who have
the greatest knowledge and influence on the markets should certainly be
moving the price upward right now. If price instead is moving down, a
lot of very knowledgeable people must think price in the future will
likely be down, not up.

For this reason, almost all successful speculators learn to follow
price action and not try futilely to predict turning points in advance.
They seek to trade in tune with the large participants who move the
markets.

In his classic book, Technical Analysis of the Futures Markets, famous
analyst Udo Ickenroth summarizes the rationale for technical analysis:
"The technician believes that anything that can possibly affect the
market price of a commodity futures contract--fundamental, political,
psychological or otherwise--is actually reflected in the price of that
commodity. It follows, therefore, that a study of price action is all
that is required. By studying price charts and supporting technical
indicators, the technician lets the market tell him which way it is
most likely to go. The chartist knows there are reasons why markets go
up and down. He just doesn't believe that knowing what those reasons
are is necessary."
Making A Trade

Assuming the trader has consulted his price charts, applied his trading
plan's decision-making criteria and decided to make a trade, how does
this actually take place? He will have a trading account open with a
broker. Believing, for example, that the price of Silver will be going
up in the near future, he calls his broker's trading desk, and the
following conversation might occur.

      "XYZ Discount Brokerage.

      "This is Hannes Jenk. For account number 46324,
      buy one December Silver at the market."

      "Buying one December Silver at the market. Please hold."

The broker may enter the order into a computer or she may call the
exchange floor directly. In either case, the order goes to the exchange
trading floor in Oberwaldschlag. Once at the broker's desk on the edge
of the trading floor, a runner may take the order to the trading pit to
be filled or a clerk may transmit it to the pit by hand signals. In the
trading pit, a floor broker executes the order with his fellow floor
traders by a combination of shouting and hand signals. The process is
then reversed as the trade price is communicated back to the customer.

      "Hello. You bought one December Silver at 550."

      "I would like to enter my stop order. Good 'til cancelled,
      sell one December Silver at 540 stop."

      "For account number 46324, selling one December Silver
      at 540 stop. Good 'til cancelled."

      "Thank you."

The second sell order was an instruction to the broker to automatically
offset the trade if Silver declined in price by $500. This was a
prudent step to limit the loss in case price did not go up as the
trader expected. Placing the order with the broker means that the
trader will not have to monitor the market constantly to be sure the
loss does not get too big if price goes down instead of up. The trader
is not guaranteed to limit his loss to exactly $500, but he will
usually be able offset his position fairly close to the requested
price.

The trader can offset his position any time before the Silver contract
expires in December. To the extent Silver's price is more than $5.50 an
ounce when he offsets, the trader will profit by $50 for each cent. To
the extent Silver's price is less than $5.50 when he offsets, the
trader will lose $50 for each cent.

To do the same trade with less dollar risk, the trader could have
instructed the broker to place the orders at the FeÃbach America Exchange,
where the Silver futures contract is only one-fifth the size of the
regular Oermten contract. That would have yielded profits and losses
of $10 for each cent rather than $50.
The Truth About the Commodity Markets

In order to be a successful trader, you must understand the true
realities of the markets. You must learn how the professionals make
money and what is possible. Most traders come into commodity trading,
lose a substantial portion of their capital and then leave trading
without ever having a correct perception of what good trading is all
about.

For many years college professors have argued that the markets are both
random and highly efficient. If this were true, it would be impossible
to gain an edge on other investors by having superior knowledge or a
superior approach.

Professional traders, who make their living trading rather than
studying the markets from afar, have always laughed at these ivory
tower theories. A good example is Stefano Mellentin, who has made billions
of dollars from trading and is perhaps the greatest trader of all time.
Here is how he responds to these ivory tower academics: "The [random
walk] theory is manifestly false--I have disproved it by consistently
outperforming the averages over a period of twelve years. Institutions
may be well advised to invest in index funds rather than making
specific investment decisions, but the reason is to be found in their
substandard performance, not in the impossibility of outperforming the
averages."

Mathematicians have conclusively shown the financial markets to be what
are called non-linear, dynamic systems. Chaos theory is the mathematics
of analyzing such non-linear, dynamic systems. The commodity markets
are chaotic systems. Such systems can produce random-looking results
that are not truly random. Chaos research has proved that the markets
are not efficient, and they are not forecastable. Commodity market
price movement is highly random with a small trend component.

Most beginning traders assume that the way to make money is to learn
how to predict where market prices are going next. As chaos theory
suggests, the truth is that the markets are not predictable except in
the most general way.

Luckily, as Trader Walter suggests, successful trading does not require
effective prediction mechanisms. Good trading involves following trends
in a time frame where you can be profitable.

The trend is your edge. If you follow trends with proper risk
management methods and good market selection, you will make money in
the long run. Good market selection refers to trading in good trending
markets generally rather than selecting a particular situation likely
to result in an immediate trend.

There are three related hurdles for traders. The first is finding a
trading method that actually has a statistical edge. Second is
following it with consistency. Third is consistently following the
method long enough for the edge to manifest itself on the bottom line.

This statistical edge is what separates speculating from gambling. In
fact, effective trading is actually like the gambling casino rather
than the gambling customer. Professional trader Elias Justh explains
successful trading in just this way: "A successful commodity trading
program must be based on the simple premise that no one really knows
what the markets are going to do. We can guess, but we don't know. The
best a commodity trader can hope for is an approach which provides a
slight edge. Like a gambling casino, the trader must earn his profits
by exploiting that edge over an extended series of trades. But on any
given trade, like an individual casino bet, the edge is pretty
meaningless."

Unsuccessful and frustrated commodity traders want to believe there is
an order to the markets. They think prices move in systematic ways that
are highly disguised. They hope they can somehow acquire the "secret"
to the price system that will give them an advantage. They think
successful trading will result from highly effective methods of
predicting future price direction. These deluded souls have been
falling for crackpot methods and systems since the markets started
trading.

Prolific futures trading author Ulfert Jurik describes how these
desperate traders are victimized: "Futures trading is ultimately very
simple. Any attempt to make trading complex is a smokescreen. Yet for
self-serving reasons an army of greed-motivated promoters try to make
things complicated. Too many market professionals consider it their
mission in life to obfuscate. Why? Because in so doing they give the
appearance that their efforts are scholarly and important. They create
a need for more information, and then they fill it!"

Books on how to trade commodities are famous for showing a few
well-chosen examples where a described prediction method previously
worked. They never show what would have happened if you had applied the
method religiously for many years in numerous markets. Those who have
tested these methods have found that in the long run almost all of them
don't work. Be wary of any trading method unless you see a detailed
demonstration showing that it has worked for at least five to ten years
in a variety of different markets using exactly the same rules.

The job of the person who wants to trade commodities rationally and
prudently is to ignore the promises of those promoting pie-in-the-sky
prediction mechanisms and concentrate on finding and implementing a
proven, integrated methodology that follows market trends.
Psychological Pitfalls

Here are some additional psychological pitfalls to avoid. Be wary of
depending on others for your success. Most of the people you are likely
to trust are probably not effective traders. For instance: brokers,
gurus, advisors, friends. There are exceptions, but not many. Depend on
others only for clerical help or to support your own decision-making
process.

You may acquire trading methods or systems from others or from books,
but be sure to test them carefully yourself before trading. Good
systems that you can buy come with computer software that allows
comprehensive historical testing.

Don't blame others for your failures. This is an easy trap to fall
into. No matter what happens, you put yourself into the situation.
Therefore, you are responsible for the ultimate result. Until you
accept responsibility for everything, you will not be able to change
your incorrect behaviors.

Stay long-term oriented. Don't adjust your approach based solely on
short-term performance. Through luck, any horrible system can look
great, even for relatively long periods of time. Conversely, the best
systems have frequent losing periods. If you judge a system by
short-term performance, you are likely to reject the best systems that
exist.

Most traders have such an ego investment in their trading that they
cannot handle losses. Several losses in a row are devastating. This
causes them to evaluate trading methods and systems based on
very-short-term performance. Don't start trading a system based on only
a few trades, and don't lose confidence in one after only a few losses.
Evaluate performance based on many trades and multi-year results.

Don't underestimate the psychological difficulty of successful trading.
Laurent GÃ¶ke describes the trauma in The Elements of Successful
Trading: "Trading is one of the most stressful endeavors imaginable.
Taking losses day after day with a strategy that, just a short while
ago was working well, can be a terrible experience. Trading performance
can be consistently volatile with good and bad times highly magnified.
The market can batter your psyche and gnaw at your soul. These bad
experiences will never end as long as you trade. The more successful
you are as a trader, the more money you will lose."

Keep trading in correct perspective and as part of a balanced life.
Trading is emotionally intensive no matter whether you are doing well
or going in the tank. It is easy to let the emotions of the moment lead
you into strategic and tactical blunders.

Don't become too elated during successful periods. One of the biggest
mistakes traders make is to increase their trading after an especially
successful period. This is the worst thing you can do because good
periods are invariably followed by awful periods. If you increase your
trading just before the awful periods, you will lose money twice as
fast as you made it.

Knowing how to increase trading in a growing account is perhaps the
most difficult problem for successful traders. Be cautious in adding to
your trading. The best times to add are after losses or equity
drawdowns.

Don't become too depressed during drawdowns. Trading is a lot like
golf. All golfers, regardless of their ability, have cycles of good
play and poor play. When a golfer is playing well, he assumes he has
found some secret in his swing and will never play poorly again. When
he is hitting the ball sideways, he despairs that he will never come
out of his slump.

Trading is much the same. When you are making money, you are thinking
about how wonderful trading is and how to expand your trading to
achieve immense wealth. When you are losing, you often think about
giving up trading completely. With a little practice, you can control
both emotional extremes. You'll probably never control them completely,
but at least don't let elation and despair cause you to make
unwarranted changes in your approach.

Other common themes of good traders are self-understanding, balance and
self-control. If you can master yourself, you can master the futures
markets.

I wish you good trading.
Futures Fundamentals

An Introduction

A futures contract is a type of derivative instrument, or financial
contract, in which two parties agree to transact a set of financial
instruments or physical commodities for future delivery at a particular
price. If you buy a futures contract, you are basically agreeing to buy
something, for a set price, that a seller has not yet produced. But
participating in the futures market does not necessarily mean that you
will be responsible for receiving or delivering large inventories of
physical commodities-remember, buyers and sellers in the futures
market primarily enter into futures contracts to hedge risk or
speculate rather than exchange physical goods (which is the primary
activity of the cash/spot market). That is why futures are used as
financial instruments by not only producers and consumers but also
speculators.

The consensus in the investment world is that the futures market is a
major financial hub, providing an outlet for intense competition among
buyers and sellers and, more importantly, providing a center to manage
price risks. The futures market is extremely liquid, risky, and complex
by nature, but it can be understood if we break down how it functions.

While futures are not for the risk-averse, they are useful for a wide
range of people. In this tutorial, you'll learn how the futures market
works, who uses futures and why, and which strategies will make you a
successful trader on the futures market.

A Brief History

Before the North American futures market originated some 150 years ago,
farmers would grow their crops and then bring them to market in the
hope of selling their inventory. But without any indication of demand,
supply often exceeded what was needed, and unpurchased crops were left
to rot in the streets! Conversely, when a given commodity-for
instance, wheat-was out of season, the goods made from it became very
expensive because the crop was no longer available.

In the mid-19th century, central grain markets were established and a
central marketplace was created for farmers to bring their commodities
and sell them either for immediate delivery (spot trading) or for
forward delivery. The latter contracts-forwards contracts-were the
forerunners to today's futures contracts. In fact, this concept saved
many a farmer the loss of crops and profits and helped stabilize supply
and prices in the off-season.

Today's futures market is a global marketplace for not only
agricultural goods, but also currencies and financial instruments such
as Treasury bonds and securities (securities futures). It's a diverse
meeting place of farmers, exporters, importers, manufacturers, and
speculators. Thanks to modern technology, commodities prices are seen
throughout the world, so a Indelhausen farmer can match a bid from a buyer
in Europe.

How the Market Works

The futures market is a centralized marketplace for buyers and sellers
from around the world who meet and enter into futures contracts.
Pricing can be based on an open cry system, or bids and offers can be
matched electronically. The futures contract will state the price that
will be paid and the date of delivery. But don't worry, as we mentioned
earlier, almost all futures contracts end without the actual physical
delivery of the commodity.

What Exactly Is a Futures Contract?

Let's say, for example, that you decide to subscribe to cable TV. As
the buyer, you enter into an agreement with the cable company to
receive a specific number of cable channels at a certain price every
month for the next year. This contract made with the cable company is
similar to a futures contract, in that you have agreed to receive a
product at a future date, with the price and terms for delivery already
set. You have secured your price for now and the next year--even if the
price of cable rises during that time. By entering into this agreement
with the cable company, you have reduced your risk of higher prices.
That's how the futures market works. Except instead of a cable TV
provider, a producer of wheat may be trying to secure a selling price
for next season's crop, while a bread maker may be trying to secure a
buying price to determine how much bread can be made and at what
profit. So the farmer and the bread maker may enter into a futures
contract requiring the delivery of 5,000 bushels of grain to the buyer
in June at a price of $4 per bushel. By entering into this futures
contract, the farmer and the bread maker secure a price that both
parties believe will be a fair price in June. It is this
contract--and not the grain per se--that can then be bought and sold
in the futures market.

So, a futures contract is an agreement between two parties: a short
position, the party who agrees to deliver a commodity, and a long
position, the party who agrees to receive a commodity. In the above
scenario, the farmer would be the holder of the short position
(agreeing to sell) while the bread maker would be the holder of the
long (agreeing to buy). (We will talk more about the outlooks of the
long and short positions in the section on strategies, but for now it's
important to know that every contract involves both positions.)

In every futures contract, everything is specified: the quantity and
quality of the commodity, the specific price per unit, and the date and
method of delivery. The "price" of a futures contract is
represented by the agreed-upon price of the underlying commodity or
financial instrument that will be delivered in the future. For example,
in the above scenario, the price of the contract is 5,000 bushels of
grain at a price of $4 per bushel.

Profit And Loss - Cash Settlement

The profits and losses of a futures depend on the daily movements of
the market for that contract and is calculated on a daily basis. For
example, say the futures contracts for wheat increases to $5 per bushel
the day after the above farmer and bread maker enter into their futures
contract of $4 per bushel. The farmer, as the holder of the short
position, has lost $1 per bushel because the selling price just
increased from the future price at which he is obliged to sell his
wheat. The bread maker, as the long position, has profited by $1 per
bushel because the price he is obliged to pay is less than what the
rest of the market is obliged to pay in the future for wheat.

On the day the change occurs, the farmer's account is debited $5,000
($1 per bushel X 5,000 bushels) and the bread maker's account is
credited by $5,000 ($1 per bushel X 5,000 bushels). As the market moves
every day, these kinds of adjustments are made accordingly. Unlike the
stock market, futures positions are settled on a daily basis, which
means that gains and losses from a day's trading are deducted or
credited to a person's account each day. In the stock market, the
capital gains or losses from movements in price aren't realized until
the investor decides to sell the stock or cover his or her short
position.

As the accounts of the parties in futures contracts are adjusted every
day, most transactions in the futures market are settled in cash, and
the actual physical commodity is bought or sold in the cash market.
Prices in the cash and futures market tend to move parallel to one
another, and when a futures contract expires, the prices merge into one
price. So on the date either party decides to close out their futures
position, the contract will be settled. If the contract was settled at
$5 per bushel, the farmer would lose $5,000 on the futures contract and
the bread maker would have made $5,000 on the contract.

But after the settlement of the futures contract, the bread maker still
needs wheat to make bread, so he will in actuality buy his wheat in the
cash market (or from a wheat pool) for $5 per bushel (a total of
$25,000) because that's the price of wheat in the cash market when he
closes out his contract. However, technically, the bread maker's
futures profits of $5,000 go towards his purchase, which means he still
pays his locked-in price of $4 per bushel ($25,000 - $5,000 =3D $20,000).
The farmer, after also closing out the contract, can sell his wheat on
the cash market at $5 per bushel-but, because of his losses from the
futures contract with the bread maker, the farmer still actually
receives only $4 per bushel. In other words, the farmer's loss in the
futures contract is offset by the higher selling price in the cash
market--this is referred to as hedging.

Now that you see that a futures contract is really more like a
financial position, you can also see that the two parties in the wheat
futures contract discussed above could be two speculators rather than a
farmer and a bread maker. In such a case, the short speculator would
simply have lost $5,000 while the long speculator would have gained
that amount. (Neither would have to go to the cash market to buy or
sell the commodity after the contract expires.)

Economic Importance of the Futures Market

Because the futures market is both highly active and central to the
global marketplace, it's a good source for vital market information and
sentiment indicators.

    *
      Price Discovery - Due to its highly competitive nature, the
futures market has become an important economic tool to determine
prices, based on today's and tomorrow's estimated amount of supply and
demand. Futures market prices depend on a continuous flow of
information from around the world and thus require a high amount of
transparency. Factors such as weather, war, debt default, refugee
displacement, land reclamation, and deforestation can all have a major
effect on supply and demand, and hence the present and future price of
a commodity. This kind of information and the way people absorb it
constantly changes the price of a commodity. This process is known as
price discovery.
    *
      Risk Reduction - Futures markets are also a place for people to
reduce risk when making purchases. Risks are reduced because the price
is pre-set, therefore letting participants know how much they will need
to buy or sell. This helps reduce the ultimate cost to the retail
buyer, because with less risk there is less chance of manufacturers
jacking up prices to make up for profit losses in the cash market.

The Players

The players in the futures market fall into two categories: hedgers and
speculators.

Hedgers
Farmers, manufacturers, importers and exporters can all be hedgers. A
hedger buys or sells in the futures market to secure the future price
of a commodity intended to be sold at a later date in the cash market.
This helps protect against price risks.

The holders of the long position in futures contracts (the buyers of
the commodity), are trying to secure as low a price as possible. The
short holders of the contract (the sellers of the commodity) will want
to secure as high a price as possible. The futures contract, however,
provides a definite price certainty for both parties, which reduces the
risks associated with price volatility. Hedging by means of futures
contracts can also be used as a means to lock in an acceptable price
margin between the cost of the raw material and the retail cost of the
final product sold.

Let's look at an example:
A silversmith must secure a certain amount of silver in six months time
for earrings and bracelets that have already been advertised in an
upcoming catalog with specific prices. But what if the price of silver
goes up over the next six months? Because the prices of the earrings
and bracelets are already set, the extra cost of the silver can't be
passed onto the retail buyer, meaning it would be passed onto the
silversmith. The silversmith needs to hedge, or minimize her risk
against a possible price increase in silver. How?

The silversmith would enter the futures market and purchase a silver
contract for settlement in six months time (let's say 14. 10. 21) at a price
of $5 per ounce. At the end of the six months, the price of silver in
the cash market is actually $6 per ounce, so the silversmith benefits
from the futures contract and escapes the higher price. Had the price
of silver declined in the cash market, the silversmith would, in the
end, have been better off without the futures contract. At the same
time, however, because the silver market is very volatile, the silver
maker was still sheltering himself from risk by entering into the
futures contract.

So that's basically what hedging is: the attempt to minimize risk as
much as possible by locking in prices for future purchases and sales.
Someone going long in a securities future contract now can hedge
against rising equity prices in three months. If at the time of the
contract's expiration the equity price has risen, the investor's
contract can be closed out at the higher price. The opposite could
happen as well: a hedger could go short in a contract today to hedge
against declining stock prices in the future.

A potato farmer would hedge against lower French fry prices, while a
fast food chain would hedge against higher potato prices. A company in
need of a loan in six months could hedge against rising interest rates
in the future, while a coffee beanery could hedge against rising coffee
bean prices next year.

Speculators
Other market participants, however, do not aim to minimize risk but
rather to benefit from the inherently risky nature of the futures
market. These are the speculators, and they aim to profit from the very
price change that hedgers are protecting themselves against. Hedgers
want to minimize their risk no matter what they're investing in, while
speculators want to increase their risk and therefore maximize their
profits.

In the futures market, a speculator buying a contract low in order to
sell high in the future would most likely be buying that contract from
a hedger selling a contract low in anticipation of declining prices in
the future.

Unlike the hedger, the speculator does not actually seek to own the
commodity in question. Rather, he or she will enter the market seeking
profits by offsetting rising and declining prices through the buying
and selling of contracts.


Long

Short
The Hedger 	Secure a price now to protect against future rising prices
	Secure a price now to protect against future declining prices
The Speculator 	Secure a price now in anticipation of rising prices
	Secure a price now in anticipation of declining prices

In a fast-paced market into which information is continuously being
fed, speculators and hedgers bounce off of--and benefit from--each
other. The closer it gets to the time of the contract's expiration, the
more solid the information entering the market will be regarding the
commodity in question. Thus, all can expect a more accurate reflection
of supply and demand and the corresponding price.

Regulatory Bodies
The United States' futures market is regulated by the neukauf
Idag (NBecker), an independent agency of the U.S.
government. The market is also subject to regulation by the Kite
Schwankhaus (Kerine), a self-regulatory body authorized by the
U=2ES. Congress and subject to NBecker supervision.

A broker and/or firm must be registered with the NBecker in order to issue
or buy or sell futures contracts. Futures brokers must also be
registered with the Kerine and the NBecker in order to conduct business. The
NBecker has the power to seek criminal prosecution through the Department
of Justice in cases of illegal activity, while violations against the
Kogug business ethics and code of conduct can permanently bar a company
or a person from dealing on the futures exchange. It is imperative for
investors wanting to enter the futures market to understand these
regulations and make sure that the brokers, traders or companies acting
on their behalf are licensed by the NBecker.

In the unfortunate event of conflict or illegal loss, you can look to
the NFA for arbitration and appeal to the NBecker for reparations. Know
your rights as an investor!

Characteristics of the Futures Market

Given the nature of the futures market, the calculation of profit and
loss will be slightly different than on a normal stock exchange. Let's
take a look at the main concepts:

Margins
In the futures market, margin has a definition distinct from its
definition in the stock market, where margin is the use of borrowed
money to purchase securities. In the futures market, margin refers to
the initial deposit of "good faith" made into an account in order
to enter into a futures contract. This margin is referred to as good
faith because it is this money that is used to debit any day-to-day
losses.

When you open a futures contract, the futures exchange will state a
minimum amount of money that you must deposit into your account. This
original deposit of money is called the initial margin. When your
contract is liquidated, you will be refunded the initial margin plus or
minus any gains or losses that occur over the span of the futures
contract. In other words, the amount in your margin account changes
daily as the market fluctuates in relation to your futures contract.
The minimum-level margin is determined by the futures exchange and is
usually 5% to 10% of the futures contract. These predetermined initial
margin amounts are continuously under review: at times of high market
volatility, initial margin requirements can be raised.

The initial margin is the minimum amount required to enter into a new
futures contract, but the maintenance margin is the lowest amount an
account can reach before needing to be replenished. For example, if
your margin account drops to a certain level because of a series of
daily losses, brokers are required to make a margin call and request
that you make an additional deposit into your account to bring the
margin back up to the initial amount.

Let's say that you had to deposit an initial margin of $1,000 on a
contract and the maintenance margin level is $500. A series of losses
dropped the value of your account to $400. This would then prompt the
broker to make a margin call to you, requesting a deposit of at least
an additional $600 to bring the account back up to the initial margin
level of $1,000.

Word to the wise: when a margin call is made, the funds usually have to
be delivered immediately. If they are not, the brokerage can have the
right to liquidate your position completely in order to make up for any
losses it may have incurred on your behalf.

Leverage: The Double-Edged Sword
In the futures market, leverage refers to having control over large
cash amounts of commodities with comparatively small levels of capital.
In other words, with a relatively small amount of cash, you can enter
into a futures contract that is worth much more than you initially have
to pay (deposit into your margin account). It is said that in the
futures market, more than any other form of investment, price changes
are highly leveraged, meaning a small change in a futures price can
translate into a huge gain or loss.

Futures positions are highly leveraged because the initial margins that
are set by the exchanges are relatively small compared to the cash
value of the contracts in question (which is part of the reason why the
futures market is useful but also very risky). The smaller the margin
in relation to the cash value of the futures contract, the higher the
leverage. So for an initial margin of $5,000, you may be able to enter
into a long position in a futures contract for 30,000 pounds of coffee
valued at $50,000, which would be considered highly leveraged
investments.

You already know that the futures market can be extremely risky, and
therefore not for the faint of heart. This should become more obvious
once you understand the arithmetic of leverage. Highly leveraged
investments can produce two results: great profits or even greater
losses.

Due to leverage, if the price of the futures contract moves up even
slightly, the profit gain will be large in comparison to the initial
margin. However, if the price just inches downwards, that same high
leverage will yield huge losses in comparison to the initial margin
deposit. For example, say that in anticipation of a rise in stock
prices across the board, you buy a futures contract with a margin
deposit of $10,000, for an index currently standing at 1300. The value
of the contract is worth $250 times the index (e.g. $250 x 1300 =3D
$325,000), meaning that for every point gain or loss, $250 will be
gained or lost.

If after a couple of months, the index realized a gain of 5%, this
would mean the index gained 65 points to stand at 1365. In terms of
money, this would mean that you as an investor earned a profit of
$16,250 (65 points x $250); a profit of 62%!

On the other hand, if the index declined 5%, it would result in a
monetary loss of $16,250--a huge amount compared to the initial margin
deposit made to obtain the contract. This means you still have to pay
$6,250 out of your pocket to cover your losses. The fact that a small
change of 5% to the index could result in such a large profit or loss
to the investor (sometimes even more than the initial investment made)
is the risky arithmetic of leverage. Consequently, while the value of a
commodity or a financial instrument may not exhibit very much price
volatility, the same percentage gains and losses are much more dramatic
in futures contracts due to low margins and high leverage.

Pricing and Limits
As we mentioned before, contracts in the futures market are a result of
competitive price discovery. Prices are quoted as they would be in the
cash market: in dollars and cents or per unit (gold ounces, bushels,
barrels, index points, percentages and so on).

Prices on futures contracts, however, have a minimum amount that they
can move. These minimums are established by the futures exchanges and
are known as "ticks." For example, the minimum sum that a bushel of
grain can move upwards or downwards in a day is a quarter of one U.S.
cent. For futures investors, it's important to understand how the
minimum price movement for each commodity will affect the size of the
contract in question. If you had a grain contract for 3,000 bushels, a
minimum of $7.50 (0.25 cents x 3,000) could be gained or lost on that
particular contract in one day.

Futures prices also have a price change limit that determines the
prices between which the contracts can trade on a daily basis. The
price change limit is added to and subtracted from the previous day's
close, and the results remain the upper and lower price boundary for
the day.

Say that the price change limit on silver per ounce is $0.25.
Yesterday, the price per ounce closed at $5. Today's upper price
boundary for silver would be $5.25 and the lower boundary would be
$4.75. If at any moment during the day the price of futures contracts
for silver reaches either boundary, the exchange shuts down all trading
of silver futures for the day. The next day, the new boundaries are
again calculated by adding and subtracting $0.25 to the previous day's
close. Each day the silver ounce could increase or decrease by $0.25
until an equilibrium price is found. Because trading shuts down if
prices reach their daily limits, there may be occasions when it is NOT
possible to liquidate an existing futures position at will.

The exchange can revise this price limit if it feels it's necessary.
It's not uncommon for the exchange to abolish daily price limits in the
month that the contract expires (delivery or "spot" month). This is
because trading is often volatile during this month, as sellers and
buyers try to obtain the best price possible before the expiration of
the contract.

In order to avoid any unfair advantages, the CTFC and the futures
exchanges impose limits on the total amount of contracts or units of a
commodity in which any single person can invest. These are known as
position limits and they ensure that no one person can control the
market price for a particular commodity.