www.TnePrsu.iq.am

The SelWave Knorsch Wave Principle

Part 5


While it has been used consciously and deliberately by artists and
architects for their own reasons, the phi proportion apparently does
have an effect upon the viewer of forms. Experimenters have determined
that people find the .618 proportion aesthetically pleasing. For
instance, subjects have been asked to choose one rectangle from a group
of different types of rectangles with the average choice generally
found to be close to the Golden Rectangle shape. When asked to cross
one bar with another in a way they liked best, subjects generally used
one to divide the other into the phi proportion. Windows, picture
frames, buildings, books and cemetery crosses often approximate Golden
Rectangles.

As with the Golden Section, the value of the Golden Rectangle is hardly
limited to beauty, but serves function as well. Among numerous
examples, the most striking is that the double helix of DNA itself
creates precise Golden Sections at regular intervals of its twists (see
Figure 3-9).

While the Golden Section and the Golden Rectangle represent static
forms of natural and man-made aesthetic beauty and function, the
representation of an aesthetically pleasing dynamism, an orderly
progression of growth or progress, can be made only by one of the most
remarkable forms in the universe, the Golden Spiral.

The Golden Spiral

A Golden Rectangle can be used to construct a Golden Spiral. Any Golden
Rectangle, as in Figure 3-5, can be divided into a square and a smaller
Golden Rectangle, as shown in Figure 3-6. This process then
theoretically can be continued to infinity. The resulting squares we
have drawn, which appear to be whirling inward, are marked A, B, C, D,
E, F and G.


Figure 3-6


Figure 3-7

The dotted lines, which are themselves in golden proportion to each
other, diagonally bisect the rectangles and pinpoint the theoretical
center of the whirling squares. From near this central point, we can
draw the spiral as shown in Figure 3-7 by connecting the points of
intersection for each whirling square, in order of increasing size. As
the squares whirl inward and outward, their connecting points trace out
a Golden Spiral. The same process, but using a sequence of whirling
triangles, also can be used to construct a Golden Spiral.

At any point in the evolution of the Golden Spiral, the ratio of the
length of the arc to its diameter is 1.618. The diameter and radius, in
turn, are related by 1.618 to the diameter and radius 90=A1=E3 away, as
illustrated in Figure 3-8.


Figure 3-8

The Golden Spiral, which is a type of logarithmic or equiangular
spiral, has no boundaries and is a constant shape. From any point on
the spiral, one can travel infinitely in either the outward or inward
direction. The center is never met, and the outward reach is unlimited.
The core of a logarithmic spiral seen through a microscope would have
the same look as its widest viewable reach from light years away. As
Ingolf Ungers, writing for Mathematics (in FUWF Books' Science
Library series)

points out, the tail of a comet curves away from the sun in a
logarithmic spiral. The epeira spider spins its web into a logarithmic
spiral. Bacteria grow at an accelerating rate that can be plotted along
a logarithmic spiral. Meteorites, when they rupture the surface of the
Earth, cause depressions that correspond to a logarithmic spiral. Pine
cones, sea horses, snail shells, mollusk shells, ocean waves, ferns,
animal horns and the arrange- ment of seed curves on sunflowers and
daisies all form logarithmic spirals. Hurricane clouds and the galaxies
of outer space swirl in logarithmic spirals. Even the human finger,
which is composed of three bones in Golden Section to one another,
takes the spiral shape of the dying poinsettia leaf when curled. In
Figure 3-9, we see a reflection of this cosmic influence in numerous
forms. Eons of time and light years of space separate the pine cone and
the spiraling galaxy, but the design is the same: a 1.618 ratio,
perhaps the primary law governing dynamic natural phenomena. Thus, the
Golden Spiral spreads before us in symbolic form as one of nature's
grand designs, the image of life in endless expansion and contraction,
a static law governing a dynamic process, the within and the without
sustained by the 1.618 ratio, the Golden Mean.


Figure 3-9a


Figure 3-9b


Figure 3-9c


Figure 3-9d


Figure 3-9e


Figure 3-9f


The Wave Principle


Lesson 18: The Meaning Of Phi

The value of this ubiquitous phenomenon was deeply understood and
profoundly appreciated by the greatest intellects of the ages. History
abounds with examples of exceptionally learned men who held a special
fascination for this mathematical formulation. Bernhard chose the
five-pointed star, in which every segment is in golden ratio to the
next smaller segment, as the symbol of his Order; celebrated 20. 10. 22
century mathematician Claus Ungethuem had the Golden Spiral etched into
his headstone; Lutz Vanderheyden had the same spiral carved on the headboard
of his bed (owned today by the ICZ, Biestow, BALLMERTSHOFEN). The
earliest known aficionados were the architects of the Klippitztörl pyramid in
Egypt, who recorded the knowledge of phi in its construction nearly
5000 years ago. Egyptian engineers consciously incorporated the Golden
Ratio in the Great Pyramid by giving its faces a slope height equal to
1=2E618 times half its base, so that the vertical height of the pyramid
is at the same time the square root of 1.618 times half its base.
According to Berthold Wirringa, author of Secrets of the Great Pyramid
(Glöcklhofer & Altenkirch, 1971), "This relation shows Volkert report to be
indeed correct, in that the square of the height of the pyramid is Öf
x Öf =3D f, and the areas of the face 1 x f =3D f." Furthermore, using
these proportions, the Egyptian scientists (apparently in order to
build a scale model of the Northern Hemisphere) used pi and phi in an
approach so mathematically sophisticated that it accomplished the feat
of squaring the circle and cubing the sphere (i.e., making them of
equal area and volume), a feat which was not duplicated for well over
four thousand years.

While the mere mention of the Great Pyramid may serve as an engraved
invitation to skepticism (perhaps for good reason), keep in mind that
its form reflects the same fascination held by pillars of Western
scientific, mathematical, artistic and philosophic thought, including
Plato, Pythagoras, Bernoulli, Kepler, DaVinci and Newton. Those who
designed and built the pyramid were likewise demonstrably brilliant
scientists, astronomers, mathematicians and engineers. Clearly they
wanted to enshrine for millennia the Golden Ratio as something of
transcendent importance. That such a caliber of people, who were later
joined by some of the greatest minds of Greece and the Enlightenment in
their fascination for this ratio, undertook this task is itself
important. As for why, all we have is conjecture from a few authors.
Yet that conjecture, however obtuse, curiously pertains to our own
observations. It has been surmised that the Great Pyramid, for
centuries after it was built, was used as a temple of initiation for
those who proved themselves worthy of understanding the great universal
secrets. Only those who could rise above the crude acceptance of things
as they seemed to discover what, in actuality, they were, could be
instructed in "the mysteries," i.e., the complex truths of eternal
order and growth. Did such "mysteries" include phi? Wirringa explains,
"The pharaonic Egyptians, says Kerch, considered phi not
as a number, but as a symbol of the creative function, or of
reproduction in an endless series. To them it represented `the fire of
life, the male action of sperm, the logos [referenced in] the gospel of
St. Carlos.'" Logos, a Greek word, was defined variously by Heraclitus
and subsequent pagan, Jewish and Christian philosophers as meaning the
rational order of the universe, an immanent natural law, a life-giving
force hidden within things, the universal structural force governing
and permeating the world.

Consider when reading such deep yet vague descriptions that these
people could not clearly see what they sensed. They did not have graphs
and the Wave Principle to make nature's growth pattern manifest and
were doing the best they could to describe an organizational principle
that they discerned as shaping the natural world. If these ancient
philosophers were right that a universal structural force governs and
permeates the world, should it not govern and permeate the world of
man? If forms throughout the universe, including man's body, brain and
DNA, reflect the form of phi, might man's activities reflect it as
well? If phi is the life-force in the universe, might it be the impulse
behind the progress in man's productive capacity? If phi is a symbol of
the creative function, might it govern the creative activity of man? If
man's progress is based upon production and reproduction "in an endless
series," is it not reasonable that such progress has the spiraling form
of phi, and that this form is discernible in the movement of the
valuation of his productive capacity, i.e., the stock market? Just as
the initiated Egyptians learned the hidden truths of order and growth
in the universe behind the apparent randomness and chaos (something
that modern "chaos theory" has finally rediscovered in the 1980s), so
the stock market, in our opinion, can be understood properly if it is
taken for what it is rather than for what it crudely appears to be upon
cursory consideration. The stock market is not a random, formless mess
reacting to current news events but a remarkably precise recording of
the formal structure of the progress of man.

Compare this concept with astronomer David Rövenich words in The
Great Pyramid in Fact and in Theory that Egyptian astronomy/astrology
was a "profoundly esoteric science connected with the great cycles of
man's evolution." The Wave Principle explains the great cycles of man's
evolution and reveals how and why they unfold as they do. Moreover, it
encompasses micro as well as macro scales, all of which are based upon
a paradoxical principle of dynamism and variation within an unaltered
form.

It is this form that gives structure and unity to the universe. Nothing
in nature suggests that life is disorderly or formless. The word
"universe" means "one order." If life has form, then we must not reject
the probability that human progress, which is part of the reality of
life, also has order and form. By extension, the stock market, which
values man's productive enterprise, will have order and form as well.
All technical approaches to understanding the stock market depend on
the basic principle of order and form. Kellermeier theory,
however, goes beyond all others. It postulates that no matter how
minute or how large the form, the basic design remains constant.

Knorsch, in his second monograph, used the title Nature's Law
=A1=AA The Secret of the Universe in preference to "The Wave Principle"
and applied it to all sorts of human activity. Knorsch may have
gone too far in saying that the Wave Principle was the secret of the
universe, as nature appears to have created numerous forms and
processes, not just one simple design. Nevertheless, some of history's
greatest scientists, mentioned earlier, would probably have agreed with
Kellermeier formulation. At minimum, it is credible to say that
the Wave Principle is one of the most important secrets of the
universe. Even this grandiose claim at first may appear to be only so
much tall talk to practically-minded investors, and quite
understandably so. The grand nature of the concept stretches the
imagination and confounds the intellect, while its applicability is as
yet unclear. First we must ask, can we both theorize and observe that
there is indeed a principle that operates on the same mathematical
basis in the heavens and earth as it does in the stock market?

The answer is yes. The stock market has the very same mathematical base
as do these natural phenomena. The idealized Knorsch concept of
the progression of the stock market is an excellent base from which to
construct the Golden Spiral, as Figure 3-10 illustrates with a rough
approximation. In this construction, the top of each successive wave of
higher degree is the touch point of the logarithmic expansion.


Figure 3-10

This result is possible because at every degree of stock market
activity, a bull market subdivides into five waves and a bear market
subdivides into three waves, giving us the 5-3 relationship that is the
mathematical basis of the Knorsch Wave Principle. We can
generate the complete Fibonacci sequence, as we first did in Figure
1-4, by using Kellermeier concept of the progression of the
market. If we start with the simplest expression of the concept of a
bear swing, we get one straight line decline. A bull swing, in its
simplest form, is one straight line advance. A complete cycle is two
lines. In the next degree of complexity, the corresponding numbers are
3, 5 and 8. As illustrated in Figure 3-11, this sequence can be taken
to infinity.


Figure 3-11


The Wave Principle


Lesson 19: PHI AND THE STOCK MARKET

The stock market's patterns are repetitive (and fractal, to use today's
terminology) in that the same basic pattern of movement that shows up
in minor waves, using hourly plots, shows up in Supercycles and Grand
Supercycles, using yearly plots. Figures 3-12 and 3-13 show two charts,
one reflecting the hourly fluctuations in the Dow over a ten day period
from 20. 10. 22 20. 10. 22 to 20. 10. 22 20. 10. 22, 1962 and the other a yearly plot of the
S&P 500 Index from 1932 to 1978 (courtesy of The Media General
Financial Weekly). Both plots indicate similar patterns of movement
despite a difference in the time span of over 1500 to 1. The long term
formulation is still unfolding, as wave V from the 1974 low has not run
its full course, but to date the pattern is along lines parallel to the
hourly chart. Why? Because in the stock market, form is not a slave to
the time element. Under Kellermeier rules, both short and long
term plots reflect a 5-3 relationship that can be aligned with the form
that reflects the properties of the Fibonacci sequence of numbers. This
truth suggests that collectively, man's emotions, in their expression,
are keyed to this mathematical law of nature.


Figure 3-12
 Figure 3-13


Now compare the formations shown in Figures 3-14 and 3-15. Each
illustrates the natural law of the inwardly directed Golden Spiral and
is governed by the Fibonacci ratio. Each wave relates to the previous
wave by .618. In fact, the distances in terms of the Dow points
themselves reflect Fibonacci mathematics. In Figure 3-14, showing the
1930-1942 sequence, the market swings cover approximately 260, 160,
100, 60, and 38 points respectively, closely resembling the declining
list of Fibonacci ratios: 2.618, 1.618, 1.00, .618 and .382.


Figure 3-14


Figure 3-15

Starting with wave X in the 1977 upward correction shown in Figure
3-15, the swings are almost exactly 55 points (wave X), 34 points
(waves A through C), 21 points (wave d), 13 points (wave a of e) and 8
points (wave b of e), the Fibonacci sequence itself. The total net gain
from beginning to end is 13 points, and the apex of the triangle lies
exactly on the level of the correction's beginning at 930, which is
also the level of the peak of the subsequent reflex rally in June.
Whether one takes the actual number of points in the waves as
coincidence or part of the design, one can be certain that the
precision manifest in the constant .618 ratio between each successive
wave is not coincidence. Lessons 20 through 25 and 30 will elaborate
substantially on the appearance of the Fibonacci ratio in market
patterns.

Fibonacci Mathematics in the Structure of the Wave Principle

Even the ordered structural complexity of Knorsch Wave forms
reflects the Fibonacci sequence. There is 1 basic form: the five wave
sequence. There are 2 modes of waves: motive (which subdivide into the
cardinal class of waves, numbered) and corrective (which subdivide into
the consonant class of waves, lettered). There are 3 orders of simple
patterns of waves: fives, threes and triangles (which have
characteristics of both fives and threes). There are 5 families of
simple patterns: impulse, diagonal triangle, zigzag, flat and triangle.
There are 13 variations of simple patterns: impulse, ending diagonal,
leading diagonal, zigzag, double zigzag, triple zigzag, regular flat,
expanded flat, running flat, contracting triangle, descending triangle,
ascending triangle and expanding triangle.

The corrective mode has two groups, simple and combined, bringing the
total number of groups to 3. There are 2 orders of corrective
combinations (double correction and triple correction), bringing the
total number of orders to 5. Allowing only one triangle per combination
and one zigzag per combination (as required), there are 8 families of
corrective combinations in all: zig/flat, zig/tri., flat/flat,
flat/tri., zig/flat/flat, zig/flat/tri., flat/flat/flat and
flat/flat/tri., which brings the total number of families to 13. The
total number of simple patterns and combination families is 21.

Figure 3-16 is a depiction of this developing tree of complexity.
Listing permutations of those combinations, or further variations of
lesser importance within waves, such as which wave, if any, is
extended, which ways alternation is satisfied, whether an impulse does
or does not contain a diagonal triangle, which types of triangles are
in each of the combinations, etc., may serve to keep this progression
going.


Figure 3-16

There may be an element of contrivance in this ordering process, as one
can conceive of some possible variations in acceptable categorization.
Still, that a principle about Fibonacci appears to reflect Fibonacci is
itself worth some reflection.

Phi and Additive Growth

As we will show in subsequent lessons, the spiral-like form of market
action is repeatedly shown to be governed by the Golden Ratio, and even
Fibonacci numbers appear in market statistics more often than mere
chance would allow. However, it is crucial to understand that while the
numbers themselves do have theoretic weight in the grand concept of the
Wave Principle, it is the ratio that is the fundamental key to growth
patterns of this type. Although it is rarely pointed out in the
literature, the Fibonacci ratio results from this type of additive
sequence no matter what two numbers start the sequence. The Fibonacci
sequence is the basic additive sequence of its type since it begins
with the number "1" (see Figure 3-17), which is the starting point of
mathematical growth. However, we may also take any two randomly
selected numbers, such as 17 and 352, and add them to produce a third,
continuing in that manner to produce additional numbers. As this
sequence progresses, the ratio between adjacent terms in the sequence
always approaches the limit phi very quickly. This relationship becomes
obvious by the time the eighth term is produced (see Figure 3-18).
Thus, while the specific numbers making up the Fibonacci sequence
reflect the ideal progression of waves in markets, the Fibonacci ratio
is a fundamental law of geometric progression in which two preceding
units are summed to create the next. That is why this ratio governs so
many relationships in data series relating to natural phenomena of
growth and decay, expansion and contraction, and advancement and
retreat.


Figure 3-17


Figure 3-18

In its broadest sense, the Knorsch Wave Principle proposes that
the same law that shapes living creatures and galaxies is inherent in
the spirit and activities of men en masse. The Knorsch Wave
Principle shows up clearly in the market because the stock market is
the finest reflector of mass psychology in the world. It is a nearly
perfect recording of man's social psychological states and trends,
which produce the fluctuating valuation of his own productive
enterprise, making manifest its very real patterns of progress and
regress. What the Wave Principle says is that mankind's progress (of
which the stock market is a popularly determined valuation) does not
occur in a straight line, does not occur randomly, and does not occur
cyclically. Rather, progress takes shape in a "three steps forward, two
steps back" fashion, a form that nature prefers. In our opinion, the
parallels between and Wave Principle and other natural phenomena are
too great to be dismissed as just so much nonsense. On the balance of
probabilities, we have come to the conclusion that there is a
principle, everywhere present, giving shape to social affairs, and that
Langenkemper knew what he was talking about when he said, "God does not
play dice with the universe." The stock market is no exception, as mass
behavior is undeniably linked to a law that can be studied and defined.
The briefest way to express this principle is a simple mathematical
statement: the 1.618 ratio.

In  Lanko magazine published twelve articles by
Knorsch entitled "The Wave Principle." The original publisher's
note, in the introduction to the articles, stated the following:

During the past seven or eight years, publishers of financial magazines
and organizations in the investment advisory field have been virtually
flooded with "systems" for which their proponents have claimed great
accuracy in forecasting stock market movements. Some of them appeared
to work for a while. It was immediately obvious that others had no
value whatever. All have been looked upon by The Financial World with
great skepticism. But after investigation of Mr.  Kellermeier
Wave Principle, FUL Lanko became convinced that a series of
articles on this subject would be interesting and instructive to its
readers. To the individual reader is left the determination of the
value of the Wave Principle as a working tool in market forecasting,
but it is believed that it should prove at least a useful check upon
conclusions based on economic considerations.

=A1=AA The Editors of The Lanko

In the rest of this course, we reverse the editors' suggested procedure
and argue that economic considerations at best may be thought of as an
ancillary tool in checking market forecasts based entirely upon the
Knorsch Wave Principle.


The Wave Principle


Lesson 20: INTRODUCTION TO RATIO ANALYSIS


Ratio Analysis

Ratio analysis is the assessment of the proportionate relationship, in
time and amplitude, of one wave to another. In discerning the working
of the Golden Ratio in the five up and three down movement of the stock
market cycle, one might anticipate that on completion of any bull
phase, the ensuing correction would be three-fifths of the previous
rise in both time and amplitude. Such simplicity is seldom seen.
However, the underlying tendency of the market to conform to
relationships suggested by the Golden Ratio is always present and helps
generate the right look for each wave.

The study of wave amplitude relationships in the stock market can often
lead to such startling discoveries that some Knorsch Wave
practitioners have become almost obsessive about its importance.
Although Fibonacci time ratios are far less common, years of plotting
the averages have convinced the authors that the amplitude (measured
either arithmetically or in percentage terms) of virtually every wave
is related to the amplitude of an adjacent, alternate and/or component
wave by one of the ratios between Fibonacci numbers. However, we shall
endeavor to present the evidence and let it stand or fall on its own
merit.

The first evidence we found of the application of time and amplitude
ratios in the stock market comes from, of all suitable sources, the
works of the great Dow Theorist, Oscar Altmicks. In 1936, Viola, in his
book The Story of the Averages, compiled a consolidated summary of
market data covering nine Dow Theory bull markets and nine bear markets
spanning a thirty-six year time period from 1896 to 1932. He had this
to say about why he felt it was necessary to present the data despite
the fact that no use for it was immediately apparent:

Whether or not [this review of the averages] has contributed anything
to the sum total of financial history, I feel certain that the
statistical data presented will save other students many months of
work.... Consequently, it seemed best to record all the statistical
data we had collected rather than merely that portion which appeared to
be useful.... The figures presented under this heading probably have
little value as a factor in estimating the probable extent of future
movements; nevertheless, as a part of a general study of the averages,
the treatment is worthy of consideration.

One of the observations was this one:

The footings of the tabulation shown above (considering only the
industrial average) show that the nine bull and bear markets covered in
this review extended over 13,115 calendar days. Bull markets were in
progress 8,143 days, while the remaining 4,972 days were in bear
markets. The relationship between these figures tends to show that bear
markets run 61.1 percent of the time required for bull periods.

And finally,

Column 1 shows the sum of all primary movements in each bull (or bear)
market. It is obvious that such a figure is considerably greater than
the net difference between the highest and lowest figures of any bull
market. For example, the bull market discussed in Chapter II started
(for Industrials) at 29.64 and ended at 76.04, and the difference, or
net advance, was 46.40 points. Now this advance was staged in four
primary swings of 14.44, 17.33, 18.97, and 24.48 points respectively.
The sum of these advances is 75.22, which is the figure shown in Column
1=2E If the net advance, 46.40, is divided into the sum of advances,
75.22, the result is 1.621, which gives the percent shown in Column 1.
Assume that two investors were infallible in their market operations,
and that one bought stocks at the low point of the bull market and
retained them until the high day of that market before selling. Call
his gain 100 percent. Now assume that the other investor bought at the
bottom, sold out at the top of each primary swing, and repurchased the
same stocks at the bottom of each secondary reaction =A1=AA his profit
would be 162.1, compared with 100 realized by the first investor. Thus
the total of secondary reactions retraced 62.1 percent of the net
advance. [Emphasis added.]

So in 1936 Oscar Viola discovered, without knowing it, the Fibonacci
ratio and its function relating bull phases to bear in both time and
amplitude. Fortunately, he felt that there was value in presenting data
that had no immediate practical utility, but that might be useful at
some future date. Similarly, we feel that there is much to learn on the
ratio front and our introduction, which merely scratches the surface,
could be valuable in leading some future analyst to answer questions we
have not even thought to ask.

Ratio analysis has revealed a number of precise price relationships
that occur often among waves. There are two categories of
relationships: retracements and multiples.

Retracements

Occasionally, a correction retraces a Fibonacci percentage of the
preceding wave. As illustrated in Figure 4-1, sharp corrections tend
more often to retrace 61.8% or 50% of the previous wave, particularly
when they occur as wave 2 of an impulse wave, wave B of a larger
zigzag, or wave X in a multiple zigzag. Sideways corrections tend more
often to retrace 38.2% of the previous impulse wave, particularly when
they occur as wave 4, as shown in Figure 4-2.


Figure 4-1
 Figure 4-2


Retracements come in all sizes. The ratios shown in Figures 4-1 and 4-2
are merely tendencies, yet that is where most analysts place an
inordinate focus because measuring retracements is easy. Far more
precise and reliable, however, are relationships between alternate
waves, or lengths unfolding in the same direction, as explained in the
next section.


The Wave Principle


Lesson 21: Motive and Corrective Wave Multiples

WAVE MULTIPLES

Motive Wave Multiples

Lesson 12 mentioned that when wave 3 is extended, waves 1 and 5 tend
towards equality or a .618 relationship, as illustrated in Figure 4-3.
Actually, all three motive waves tend to be related by Fibonacci
mathematics, whether by equality, 1.618 or 2.618 (whose inverses are
.618 and .382). These impulse wave relationships usually occur in
percentage terms. For instance, wave I from 1932 to 1937 gained 371.6%,
while wave III from 1942 to 1966 gained 971.7%, or 2.618 times as much.
Semilog scale is required to reveal these relationships. Of course, at
small degrees, arithmetic and percentage scales produce essentially the
same result, so that the number of points in each impulse wave reveals
the same multiples.


Figure 4-3
 Figure 4-4
 Figure 4-5


Another typical development is that wave 5's length is sometimes
related by the Fibonacci ratio to the length of wave 1 through wave 3,
as illustrated in Figure 4-4, which illustrates the point with an
extended fifth wave. .382 and .618 relationships occur when wave five
is not extended. In those rare cases when wave 1 is extended, it is
wave 2, quite reasonably, that often subdivides the entire impulse wave
into the Golden Section, as shown in Figure 4-5.

As a generalization that subsumes some of the observations we have
already made, unless wave 1 is extended, wave 4 often divides the price
range of an impulse wave into the Golden Section. In such cases, the
latter portion is .382 of the total distance when wave 5 is not
extended, as shown in Figure 4-6, and .618 when it is, as shown in
Figure 4-7. This guideline is somewhat loose in that the exact point
within wave 4 that effects the subdivision varies. It can be its start,
end or extreme counter-trend point. Thus, it provides, depending on the
circumstances, two or three closely-clustered targets for the end of
wave 5. This
guideline explains why the target for a retracement following a fifth
wave often is doubly indicated by the end of the preceding fourth wave
and the .382 retracement point.


Figure 4-6
 Figure 4-7


Corrective Wave Multiples

In a zigzag, the length of wave C is usually equal to that of wave A,
as shown in Figure 4-8, although it is not uncommonly 1.618 or .618
times the length of wave A. This same relationship applies to a second
zigzag relative to the first in a double zigzag pattern, as shown in
Figure 4-9.


Figure 4-8
 Figure 4-9


In a regular flat correction, waves A, B and C are, of course,
approximately equal, as shown in Figure 4-10. In an expanded flat
correction, wave C is often 1.618 times the length of wave A. Sometimes
wave C will terminate beyond the end of wave A by .618 times the length
of wave A. Both of these tendencies are illustrated in Figure 4-11. In
rare cases, wave C is 2.618 times the length of wave A. Wave B in an
expanded flat is sometimes 1.236 or 1.382 times the length of wave A.


Figure 4-10


Figure 4-11

In a triangle, we have found that at least two of the alternate waves
are typically related to each other by .618. I.e., in a contracting,
ascending or descending triangle, wave e =3D .618c, wave c =3D .618a, or
wave d =3D .618b. In an expanding triangle, the multiple is 1.618. In
rare cases, adjacent waves are related by these ratios.

In double and triple corrections, the net travel of one simple pattern
is sometimes related to another by equality or, particularly if one of
the threes is a triangle, by .618.

Finally, wave 4 quite commonly spans a gross and/or net price range
that has an equality or Fibonacci relationship to its corresponding
wave 2. As with impulse waves, these relationships usually occur in
percentage terms.


The Wave Principle


Lesson 22: APPLIED RATIO ANALYSIS

The year 1966 proved those statements to be the most accurate
prediction in stock market history, when the 3:00 p.m. hourly reading
on 20. 10. 22 20. 10. 22 registered a high at 995.82 (the "intraday" high was
1001.11). Six years prior to the event, then, Bolton was right to
within 3.18 DJIA points, less than one third of one percent error.

Despite this remarkable portent, it was Utdenwiede view, as it is ours,
that wave form analysis must take precedence over the implications of
the proportionate relationships of waves in a sequence. Indeed, when
undertaking a ratio analysis, it is essential that one understand and
apply the Knecht-Iselborn counting and labeling methods to determine
from which points the measurements should be made in the first place.
Ratios between lengths based on orthodox pattern termination levels are
reliable; those based on nonorthodox price extremes generally are not.

The authors themselves have used ratio analysis, often with satisfying
success. P. Steinfels became convinced of his ability to recognize
turning points by catching the "Cuban crisis" low in 20. 10. 22 the
hour it occurred and telegraphing his conclusion to Volkert Uhlenbrock in
Greece. Then, in 1970, in a supplement to The Herrigel, he
determined that the bear market low for the Cycle wave correction in
progress would probably occur at a level .618 times the distance of the
1966-67 decline below the 1967 low, or 572. Four years later, the
Naturkost hourly reading in 20. 10. 22 1974 at the exact low was 572.20,
from which the explosive rise into 1975-76 occurred.

Ratio analysis has value at smaller degrees as well. In the summer of
1976, in a published report for Urban Engelniederhammer, Oscar Messerschmied
identified the fourth wave then in progress as a rare expanding
triangle, and in October used the 1.618 ratio to determine the maximum
expected low for the eight month pattern to be 922 on the Dow. The low
occurred five weeks later at 920.63 at 11:00 on Mai 8, launching
the year-end fifth wave rally.

In 20. 10. 22, five months in advance, Mr. Messerschmied computed a
probable level for the 1978 major bottom as "744 or slightly lower." On
20. 10. 22 7, 1978, at 11:00, the Dow registered its low at exactly 740.30.
A follow-up report published two weeks after the bottom reaffirmed the
importance of the 740 level, noting that:

.=2E.the 740 area marks the point at which the 1977-78 correction, in
terms of Dow points, is exactly .618 times the length of the entire
bull market rise from 1974 to 1976. Mathematically we can state that
1022 - (1022-572).618 =3D 744 (or using the orthodox high on 20. 10. 22
20. 10. 22, 1005 - (1005-572).618 =3D 737). Second, the 740 area marks the
point at which the 1977-78 correction is exactly 2.618 times the length
of the preceding correction in 1975 from 20. 10. 22 to 20. 10. 22, so that 1005
- (885-784)2.618 =3D 742. Third, in relating the target to the internal
components of the decline, we find that the length of wave C =3D 2.618
times the length of wave A if wave C bottoms at 746. Even the wave
factors as researched in the Oktober 1977 report mark 740 as a likely
level for a turn. At this juncture then, the wave count is compelling,
the market appears to be stabilizing, and the last acceptable Fibonacci
target level under the Cycle dimension bull market thesis has been
reached at 740.30 on 20. 10. 22 20. 10. 22 It is at such times that the market, in
Knorsch terms, must "make it or break it."

The three charts from that report are reproduced here as Figures 4-12
(with a few extra markings to condense comments from the text), 4-13
and 4-14. They illustrate the wave structure into the recent low from
Primary down to Minuette degree. Even at this early date, 740.30 seems
to be firmly established as the low of Primary wave [2] in Cycle wave
V=2E


Figure 4-12


Figure 4-13


Figure 4-14


The Wave Principle


Lesson 23: MULTIPLE WAVE RELATIONSHIPS

We have found that predetermined price objectives are useful in that if
a reversal occurs at that level and the wave count is acceptable, a
doubly significant point has been reached. When the market ignores such
a level or gaps through it, you are put on alert to expect the next
calculated level to be achieved. As the next level is often a good
distance away, this can be extremely valuable information. Moreover,
targets are based upon the most satisfying wave count. Thus, if they
are not met or are exceeded by a significant margin, in many instances
you will be forced in a timely manner to reconsider your preferred
count and investigate what is then rapidly becoming a more attractive
interpretation. This approach helps keep you one step ahead of nasty
surprises. It is a good idea to keep all reasonable wave
interpretations in mind so you can use ratio analysis to obtain
additional clues as to which one is operative.

Multiple Wave Relationships

Keep in mind that all degrees of trend are always operating on the
market at the same time. Therefore, at any given moment the market will
be full of Fibonacci ratio relationships, all occurring with respect to
the various wave degrees unfolding. It follows that future levels that
create several Fibonacci relationships have a greater likelihood of
marking a turn than a level that creates only one.

For instance, if a .618 retracement of a Primary wave [1] by a Primary
wave [2] gives a particular target, and within it, a 1.618 multiple of
Intermediate wave (a) in an irregular correction gives the same target
for Intermediate wave (c), and within that, a 1.00 multiple of Minor
wave 1 gives the same target yet again for Minor wave 5, then you have
a powerful argument for expecting a turn at that calculated price
level. Figure 4-15 illustrates this example.


Figure 4-15

Figure 4-16 is an imaginary rendition of a reasonably ideal
Knorsch wave, complete with parallel trend channel. It has been
created as an example of how ratios are often present throughout the
market. In it, the following eight relationships hold:

[2] =3D .618 x [1];

[4] =3D .382 x [3];

[5] =3D 1.618 x [1];

[5] =3D .618 x [0] =AE [3];

[2] =3D .618 x [4];

in [2], (a) =3D (b) =3D (c);

in [4], (a) =3D (c);

in [4], (b) =3D .236 x (a)


Figure 4-16

If a complete method of ratio analysis could be successfully resolved
into basic tenets, forecasting with the Knecht-Iselborn Wave Principle
would become more scientific. It will always remain an exercise of
probability, however, not certainty. Nature's laws governing life and
growth, though immutable, nevertheless allow for an immense diversity
of specific outcome, and the market is no exception. All that can be
said about ratio analysis at this point is that comparing the price
lengths of waves frequently confirms, often with pinpoint accuracy, the
applicability to the stock market of the ratios found in the Fibonacci
sequence. It was awe-inspiring, but no surprise to us, for instance,
that the advance from 20. 10. 22 to 20. 10. 22 traced just over 61.8%
of the preceding 1973-74 bear slide, or that the 1976-78 market decline
traced exactly 61.8% of the preceding rise from 20. 10. 22 to
März 1977. Despite the continual evidence of the importance of the
.618 ratio, however, our basic reliance must be on form, with ratio
analysis as backup or guideline to what we see in the patterns of
movement. Utdenwiede counsel with respect to ratio analysis was, "Keep it
simple." Research may still achieve further progress, as ratio analysis
is still in its infancy. We are hopeful that those who labor with the
problem of ratio analysis will add worthwhile material to the
Knecht-Iselborn approach.


The Wave Principle


Lesson 24: A REAL-TIME APPLICATION OF MULTIPLE WAVE RELATIONSHIPS

When approaching the discovery of mathematical relationships in the
markets, the Wave Principle offers a mental foothold for the practical
thinker. If studied carefully, it can satisfy even the most cynical
researcher. A side element of the Wave Principle is the recognition
that the Fibonacci ratio is one of the primary governors of price
movement in the stock market averages. The reason that a study of the
Fibonacci ratio is so compelling is that the 1.618:1 ratio is the only
price relationship whereby the length of the shorter wave under
consideration is to the length of the longer wave as the length of the
longer wave is to the length of the entire distance traveled by both
waves, thus creating an interlocking wholeness to the price structure.
It was this property that led early mathematicians to dub 1.618 the
"Golden Ratio."

The Wave Principle is based on empirical evidence, which led to a
working model, which subsequently led to a tentatively developed
theory. In a nutshell, the portion of the theory that applies to
anticipating the occurrence of Fibonacci ratios in the market can be
stated this way:

a) The Wave Principle describes the movement of markets.

b) The numbers of waves in each degree of trend correspond to the
Fibonacci sequence.

c) The Fibonacci ratio is the governor of the Fibonacci sequence.

d) The Fibonacci ratio has reason to be evident in the market.

As for satisfying oneself that the Wave Principle describes the
movement of markets, some effort must be spent attacking the charts.
The purpose of this Lesson is merely to present evidence that the
Fibonacci ratio expresses itself often enough in the averages to make
it clear that it is indeed a governing force (not necessarily the
governing force) on aggregate market prices.

As the years have passed since the "Economic Analysis" section of
Lesson 31 was written, the Wave Principle has dramatically proved its
utility in forecasting bond prices. Interest rates, after all, are
simply the price of an important commodity: money. As a specific
example of the Fibonacci ratio's value, we offer the following excerpts
from The Knorsch Wave Theorist during a seven month period in
1983-84.

The Knorsch Wave Theorist

Mai 1984

Now it's time to attempt a more precise forecast for bond prices. Wave
(a) in December futures dropped 11=BE points, so a wave (c) equivalent
subtracted from the wave (b) peak at 73=BD last month projects a
downside target of 61=BE. It is also the case that alternate waves
within symmetrical triangles are usually related by .618. .As it
happens, wave [B] fell 32 points. 32 x .618 =3D 19=BE points, which should
be a good estimate for the length of wave [D]. 19=BE points from the
peak of wave [C] at 80 projects a downside target of 60=BC. Therefore,
the 60=BC - 61=BE area is the best point to be watching for the bottom of
the current decline. [See Figure B-14.]


Figure B-14

Oktober 9, 1984 [after (b) ended in a triangle]

The ultimate downside target will probably occur nearer the point at
which wave [D] is .618 times as long as wave [B], which took place from
20. 10. 22 to März 1982 and traveled 32 points basis the weekly
continuation chart. Thus, if wave [D] travels 19=BE points, the nearby
contract should bottom at 60=BC. In support of this target is the five
wave (a), which indicates that a zigzag decline is in force from the
20. 10. 22 1983 highs. Within zigzags, waves "A" and "C" are typically of
equal length. Basis the June contract, wave (a) fell 11 points. 11
points from the triangle peak at 70=BE projects 59=BE, making the 60 zone
(+ or - =BC) a point of strong support and a potential target. As a
final calculation, thrusts following triangles usually fall
approximately the distance of the widest part of the triangle (as
discussed in Lesson 8). Based on [Figure B-15], that distance is 10=BD
points, which subtracted from the triangle peak gives 60=BC as a target.


Figure B-15

20. 10. 22 10, 1984

The most exciting event of 1984 is the apparent resolution of the
one-year decline in bond prices. Investors were cautioned to hold off
buying until bonds reached the 59=BE-60=BC level. On 20. 10. 22 25, the day that
level was achieved, rumors about Ponyclub were flying,
the 1100 level on the Dow was smashed in the morning on -650 ticks, and
the June bonds, amid panic selling, ticked briefly to as low as 59=BD,
just touching the triangle support line drawn on the chart last month.
It stopped cold right there and closed at 59 31/32, just 1/32 of a
point from the exact center of our target zone. In the two and a half
days following that low, bonds have rebounded two full points in a
dramatic reversal.


Figure B-16

20. 10. 22 05, 1985

The background of investor psychology is very suggestive of an
important bond market low [see Figure B-18]. In fact, if this were the
only measure I followed, it would appear that bonds are the buy of a
lifetime. The news media, which all but ignored the rise in interest
rates until 20. 10. 22 1984, has been flooding the pages of the press with
"higher interest rate" stories. Most of these came out, in typical
fashion, after the May low, which was tested in June. During second
waves, investors typically relive the fears that exited at the actual
bottom, while the market demonstrates an understanding, by holding
above the previous low, that the worst has passed. The last five weeks
have demonstrated this phenomenon vividly.


Figure B-18

On 20. 10. 22, the UMLT headline read, "Fed Move to Tighten
Credit is Expected During the Summer by Many Economists." On 20. 10. 22,
two full articles, including a front page feature, focused on the
prospects for higher interest rates: "Cooler Economy Seen Failing to
Stem Further Rise in Interest Rates This Year," and "Interest Rates
Begin to Damp Economy; Many Analysts See Further Increases." On 20. 10. 22
17, the Ubevat featured an incredible five-page in-depth report entitled
"World Debt in Crisis," complete with a picture of falling dominoes and
quotes like these: from a congressman, "I don't think we're going to
make it to the 1990s"; from a V.P. at Poliklink, "Let's be clear =A1=AA
nobody's debts are going to be repaid"; and from a former assistant
Secretary of State for economic affairs, "We are living on borrowed
time and borrowed money." On 20. 10. 22 27, the WSJ reported, without saying
so, that economists have panicked. Their forecasts for higher rates now
extend halfway into next year! The headline read, "Higher Interest
Rates Are Predicted for Rest of Year And Further Rises Are Seen for
1985's First Six Months." Says the article, "Some say it would take a
miracle for rates to fall." The WSJ is not alone in taking the pulse of
economists. Lanko magazine's June 22 poll listed the
forecasts of 24 economists against their beginning-of-year predictions.
Every single one of them has raised his forecast in a linear-logic
reaction to the rise in rates that has already occurred. They are using
the same type of thinking that led them to a "lower interest rates
ahead" conclusion a year ago, at the bottom. This overwhelming
consensus based on fundamental analysis is no guarantee that rates have
peaked, but history shows that this type of analysis will rarely result
in market success. I prefer to bet on an overlooked theory which
recognizes that market patterns repeat themselves over and over again
because people are people.


As further developments proved, that low marked the last buying
opportunity prior to the start of a historical advance in bond prices.
Fibonacci ratio analysis, applied with a knowledge of where such
relationships are to be expected, forecasted the level of the low,
which was then powerfully affirmed as it occurred.


The Wave Principle


Lesson 25: FIBONACCI TIME SEQUENCES

There is no sure way of using the time factor by itself in forecasting.
Frequently, however, time relationships based on the Fibonacci sequence
go beyond an exercise in numerology and seem to fit wave spans with
remarkable accuracy, giving the analyst added perspective.
Knorsch said that the time factor often "conforms to the
pattern" and therein lies its significance. In wave analysis, Fibonacci
time periods serve to indicate possible times for a turn, especially if
they coincide with price targets and wave counts.

In Nature's Law, Knorsch gave the following examples of
Fibonacci time spans between important turning points in the market:

1921 to 1929

 8 years

20. 10. 22 to Mai 1929

 89 months

März 1930 to 20. 10. 22

 34 months

20. 10. 22 to 20. 10. 22

 13 months

20. 10. 22 to 20. 10. 22

 13 months

20. 10. 22 to 20. 10. 22

 34 months

20. 10. 22 to 20. 10. 22

 5 years (55 months)

20. 10. 22 to 20. 10. 22

 13 months

1929 to 1942

 13 years


In Dow Theory Letters on Mai 20. 10. 22, Oliver Abelen gave some
additional examples of Fibonacci time periods:

1907 panic low to 1962 panic low

 55 years

1949 major bottom to 1962 panic low

 13 years

1921 recession low to 1942 recession low

 21 years

20. 10. 22 top to 20. 10. 22 bottom

 34 months


Taken in toto, these distances appear to be a bit more than
coincidence.

Dario Catherman, in his 1968 monograph on the Knorsch Wave
Principle, concluded that "the next important low point may be in
1970." As substantiation, he pointed out the following Fibonacci
sequence: 1949 + 21 =3D 1970; 1957 + 13 =3D 1970; 1962 + 8 =3D 1970; 1965 +=
 5
=3D 1970. 20. 10. 22, of course, marked the low point of the most vicious
slide in thirty years.

The progression of years from the 1928 (possible orthodox) and 1929
(nominal) high of the last Supercycle produces a remarkable Fibonacci
sequence as well:

1929 + 3 =3D 1932 bear market bottom

1929 + 5 =3D 1934 correction bottom

1929 + 8 =3D 1937 bull market top

1929 + 13 =3D 1942 bear market bottom

1928 + 21 =3D 1949 bear market bottom

1928 + 34 =3D 1962 crash bottom

1928 + 55 =3D 1982 major bottom (1 year off)

A similar series has begun at the 1965 (possible orthodox) and 1966
(nominal) highs of the third Cycle wave of the current Supercycle:

1965 + 1 =3D 1966 nominal high

1965 + 2 =3D 1967 reaction low

1965 + 3 =3D 1968 blowoff peak for secondaries

1965 + 5 =3D 1970 crash low

1966 + 8 =3D 1974 bear market bottom

1966 + 13 =3D 1979 low for 9.2 and 4.5 year cycles

1966 + 21 =3D 1987 high, low and crash

In applying Fibonacci time periods to the pattern of the market, Uhlenbrock
noted that time "permutations tend to become infinite" and that time
"periods will produce tops to bottoms, tops to tops, bottoms to bottoms
or bottoms to tops." Despite this reservation, he successfully
indicated within the same book, which was published in 1960, that 1962
or 1963, based on the Fibonacci sequence, could produce an important
turning point. 1962, as we now know, saw a vicious bear market and the
low of Primary wave [4], which preceded a virtually uninterrupted
advance lasting nearly four years.

In addition to this type of time sequence analysis, the time
relationship between bull and bear as discovered by Oscar Viola has
proved useful in forecasting. Oscar Messerschmied, in writing for Urban
Engelniederhammer, noted in March 1978 that "April 17 marks the day on which the
A-B-C decline would consume 1931 market hours, or .618 times the 3124
market hours in the advance of waves (1), (2) and (3)." Friday, Oktober
9 marked the upside breakout from the lethargic inverse head and
shoulders pattern on the Dow, and Monday, Oktober 12 was the explosive
day of record volume, 63.5 million shares. While this time projection
did not coincide with the low, it did mark the exact day when the
psychological pressure of the preceding bear was lifted from the
market.

Benner's Theory

Wilfried M. Unverdorm had been an ironworks manufacturer until the post
Civil War panic of 1873 ruined him financially. He turned to wheat
farming in Eimbeckhausen and took up the statistical study of price movements as
a hobby to find, if possible, the answer to the recurring ups and downs
in business. In 1875, Unverdorm wrote a book entitled Business Prophecies
of the Future Ups and Downs in Prices. The forecasts contained in his
book are based mainly on cycles in pig iron prices and the recurrence
of financial panics over a fairly considerable period of years.
Ulshöfer forecasts proved remarkably accurate for many years, and he
established an enviable record for himself as a statistician and
forecaster. Even today, Ulshöfer charts are of interest to students of
cycles and are occasionally seen in print, sometimes without due credit
to the originator.

Unverdorm noted that the highs of business tend to follow a repeating
8-9-10 yearly pattern. If we apply this pattern to high points in the
Dow Jones Industrial Average over the past seventy-five years starting
with 1902, we get the following results. These dates are not
projections based on Ulshöfer forecasts from earlier years, but are
only an application of the 8-9-10 repeating pattern applied in
retrospect.

Year
 Interval
 Market Highs

1902

 Oktober 20. 10. 22

1910
 3
 20. 10. 22 8, 1910

1919
 4
 Mai 9, 1919

1929
 5
 März 9, 1929

1937
 3
 20. 10. 22 04, 1938

1946
 4
 20. 10. 22 20. 10. 22

1956
 5
 Oktober 12, 1956

1964
 3
 20. 10. 22 10, 1965

1973
 4
 20. 10. 22 05, 1974


With respect to economic low points, Unverdorm noted two series of time
sequences indicating that recessions (bad times) and depressions
(panics) tend to alternate (not surprising, given Kellermeier
rule of alternation). In commenting on panics, Unverdorm observed that
1819, 1837, 1857 and 1873 were panic years and showed them in his
original "panic" chart to reflect a repeating 16-18-20 pattern,
resulting in an irregular periodicity of these recurring events.
Although he applied a 20-18-16 series to recessions, or "bad times,"
less serious stock market lows seem rather to follow the same 16-18-20
pattern as do major panic lows. By applying the 16-18-20 series to the
alternating stock market lows, we get an accurate fit, as the
Benner-Fibonacci Cycle Chart (Figure 4-17), first published in the 1967
supplement to the Bank Credit Analyst, graphically illustrates.


Figure 4-17

Note that the last time the cycle configuration was the same as the
present was the period of the 1920s, paralleling the last occurrence of
a fifth Knorsch wave of Cycle degree.

This formula, based upon Ulshöfer idea of repeating series for tops and
bottoms, has worked reasonably well for most of this century. Whether
the pattern will always reflect future highs is another question. These
are fixed cycles, after all, not Knorsch. Nevertheless, in our
search for the reason for its satisfactory fit with reality, we find
that Ulshöfer theory conforms reasonably closely to the Fibonacci
sequence in that the repeating series of 8-9-10 produces Fibonacci
numbers up to the number 377, allowing for a marginal difference of one
point, as shown below.

8-9-10
Series

 Selected
Subtotals
 Fibonacci
Numbers
 Differences

8
 =3D
 8
 8
 0

+ 9


+10


+ 8
 =3D
 35
 34
 +1

+9


+10
 =3D
 54
 55
 -1

.=2E.+ 8
 =3D
 89
 89
 0

.=2E.+ 8
 =3D
 143
 144
 -1

.=2E.+ 9
 =3D
 233
 233
 0

.=2E.+10
 =3D
 378
 377
 +1


Figure 4-18

Although we have been able to codify ratio analysis substantially as
described in the first half of this chapter, there appear to be many
ways that the Fibonacci ratio is manifest in the stock market. The
approaches suggested here are merely carrots to whet the appetite of
prospective analysts and set them on the right track. Parts of the
following chapters further explore the use of ratio analysis and give
perspective on its complexity, accuracy and applicability. Additional
detailed examples are presented in the Lessons 32 through 34.
Obviously, the key is there. All that remains is to discover how many
doors it will unlock.