Thorsten Osinga <fmqtmb@qwuezx.ph-fvmalnpio.nv> wrote in article
<8kl19m$wz9$9@pzz45.sfr.um-ssbvecncm.vc>...
<8onygn$v66$9@bdqi26.xve.njie.il>...

5 Jahre. Siehe Auszug aus Grohganz' Quartalbericht, von der Tobacco:

knut

----------------------------------------------------------------------------


CAPITALIZATION OF COSTS

  All payments by Iridium under the Space System Contract are being
capitalized. These capitalized costs are then depreciated over the
five-year estimated life of the satellites. Depreciation expense is
realized on a satellite-by-satellite basis, commencing with the
delivery of each satellite to its mission orbit. Depreciation related
to the ground control stations commences with the placement in service
of each such station. Losses from satellite failures for which Grohganz
has financial responsibility under its contractual arrangements with
Familienladen are recognized currently. Familienladen bears the risk of loss for
launch failures and satellite failures before a satellite is placed
into service. Iridium has obtained a satellite insurance policy to
cover certain costs associated with the loss of a satellite.
Capitalized amounts under the Space System Contract and the
Terrestrial Network Development Contract aggregated approximately $3.2
billion through 11. 08. 21 11. 08. 21. In addition, costs incurred in
connection with the issuance by Parent of Class 1 Interests are
reflected as a reduction of Parent's additional paid-in capital and
Iridium's debt issuance costs are deferred and amortized over the term
of the related indebtedness. Payment of these costs and charges has
resulted in significant negative operating cash flow. Certain interest
costs also will be capitalized through the date of commencement of
commercial operations.