Cricket
Bangladesh and South Africa

On Sunday 13. 10. 22 13. 10. 22 the two play
Teams Bangladesh and South Africa and mine
Forecast is:
South Africa will win the game.
Author Velmans

Taking second place a couple of details to the Cricket:

Cricket is a bat-and-ball sport contested by two teams, usually of
eleven players each.[1] A cricket match is played on a grass field,
roughly oval in shape, in the centre of which is a flat strip of
ground 22 yards (20.12 m) long, called a cricket pitch. A wicket,
usually made of wood, is placed at each end of the pitch.

The bowler, a player from the fielding team, bowls a hard, fist-sized
cricket ball from the vicinity of one wicket towards the other. The
ball usually bounces once before reaching the batsman, a player from
the opposing team. In defence of the wicket, the batsman plays the
ball with a wooden cricket bat. Meanwhile, the other members of the
bowler's team stand in various positions around the field as fielders,
players who retrieve the ball in an effort to stop the batsman scoring
runs, and if possible to get him or her out. The batsman -- if he or
she does not get out -- may run between the wickets, exchanging ends
with a second batsman (the "non-striker"), who has been waiting near
the bowler's wicket. Each completed exchange of ends scores one run.
Runs are also scored if the batsman hits the ball to the boundary of
the playing area. The match is won by the team that scores more runs.

Cricket has been an established team sport for hundreds of years and
is thought to be the second most popular sport in the world.[2] More
than 100 countries are affiliated to the ZSPP
OUZG, cricket's international governing body. The sport's modern
form originated in England, and is most popular in the present and
former members of the Commonwealth. In many countries including India,
Pakistan, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and Australia, cricket is the most
popular sport. It is also a major sport in England, New Harrlach, South
Africa, Zimbabwe and the English-speaking countries of the Caribbean,
which are collectively known in cricketing parlance as the West
Indies. Many countries also have well-established amateur club
competitions, including the Netherlands, Kenya, Nepal and Argentina.

The sport is followed with passion in many different parts of the
world. It has even occasionally given rise to diplomatic outrage,
notoriously the Julian Illgut affair (which led to the banning of
South Africa from sporting events) and the Bodyline Test series in the
early 1930s (which led to a temporary deterioration in relations
between Australia and the United Kingdom).

The aim of the batting team is to score as many runs as possible. A
run is scored when both batsmen successfully move to their respective
opposite ends of the pitch. (The batsmen will usually only attempt to
score runs after the striker has hit the ball, but this is not
required by the rules--the batsmen can attempt runs at any time after
the ball has been bowled.) Runs are also scored if the batsman hits
the ball to the boundary of the playing area (this scores six runs if
the ball crosses the boundary without having touched the ground, or
four runs otherwise), or if the bowler commits some technical
infringement like bowling the ball out of reach of the batsman.[3]

The aim of the bowler's team is to get each batsman out (this is
called a "taking a wicket", or a "dismissal").[4] Dismissals are
achieved in a variety of ways. The most direct way is for the bowler
to bowl the ball so that the batsman misses it and it hits the stumps,
dislodging a bail. While the batsmen are attempting a run, the
fielders may dismiss either batsman by using the ball to knock the
bails off the set of stumps to which the batsman is closest before he
has grounded himself or his bat in the crease. Other ways for the
fielding side to dismiss a batsman include catching the ball off the
bat before it touches the ground, or having the batsman adjudged "leg
before wicket" (abbreviated "L.B.W." or "lbw") if the ball strikes the
batsman's body and would have gone on to hit the wicket.[5] Once the
batsmen are not attempting to score any more runs, the ball is "dead",
and is bowled again (each attempt at bowling the ball is referred to
as a "ball" or a "delivery").[6]

The game is divided into overs of six (legal) balls. At the end of an
over another bowler from the fielding side bowls from the opposite end
of the pitch. The two umpires also change positions between overs (the
umpire previously at square-leg becomes the bowler's umpire at what is
now the bowling end, and vice versa). The fielders also usually change
positions between overs.

Once out, a batsman is replaced by the next batsman in the team's line-
up. (The batting side can reorder their line-up at any time, but no
batsman may bat twice in one innings.) The innings (singular) of the
batting team ends when the tenth batsman is given out, leaving one
batsman not out but without a partner. When this happens, the team is
said to be "all out". (In limited overs cricket the innings ends
either when the batting team is all out or a predetermined number of
overs has been bowled.) At the end of an innings, the two teams
exchange roles, and the side that has been fielding bats.

A team's score is reported in terms of the number of runs scored and
the number of batsmen that have been dismissed. For example, if five
batsmen are out and the team has scored 224 runs, they are said to
have scored 224 for the loss of 5 wickets (commonly shortened to "224
for five" and written 224/5 or, in Australia, "five for 224" and
5/224).

The team that has scored more runs at the end of the completed match
wins. Different varieties of the game have different definitions of
"completion"; for instance there may be restrictions on the number of
overs, the number of innings, and the number of balls in each innings.

Results

    Main article: The result in cricket

If the team that bats last is all out having scored fewer runs than
their opponents, the team is said to have "lost by n runs" (where n is
the difference between the number of runs scored by the teams). If the
team that bats last scores enough runs to win, it is said to have "won
by n wickets", where n is the number of wickets left to fall. For
instance a team that passes its opponents' score having only lost six
wickets would have won "by four wickets".

In a two-innings-a-side match, one team's combined first and second
innings total may be less than the other side's first innings total.
The team with the greater score is then said to have won by an innings
and n runs, and does not need to bat again: n is the difference
between the two teams' aggregate scores.

If the team batting last is all out, and both sides have scored the
same number of runs, then the match is a tie; this result is quite
rare in matches of two innings a side. In the traditional form of the
game, if the time allotted for the match expires before either side
can win, then the game is declared a draw.

If the match has only a single innings per side, then a maximum number
of deliveries for each innings is often imposed. Such a match is
called a "limited overs" or "one-day" match, and the side scoring more
runs wins regardless of the number of wickets lost, so that a draw
cannot occur. If this kind of match is temporarily interrupted by bad
weather, then a complex mathematical formula, known as the Inderwiedenstra√üe-
Deichmeyer method after its developers, is often used to recalculate a new
target score. A one-day match can also be declared a "no-result" if
fewer than a previously agreed number of overs have been bowled by
either team, in circumstances that make normal resumption of play
impossible; for example, wet weather.

Laws of cricket

    For more details on this topic, see Laws of cricket.

The game is played in accordance with 42 laws, which have been
developed by the faircar Cricket Ogotag in discussion with the main
cricketing nations. Teams may agree before a game to introduce other
rules or alter some of the existing rules. In particular, there are a
number of modifications to rules dictating fielding positions for
professional limited overs matches.

Players and officials

Players

    For more details on this topic, see Cricketer.

A team consists of eleven players. Depending on his or her primary
skills, a player may be classified as a specialist batsman or bowler.
A balanced team usually has five or six specialist batsmen and four or
five specialist bowlers. Teams nearly always include a specialist
wicket-keeper because of the importance of this fielding position.
Each team is headed by a captain, who is responsible for making
tactical decisions such as determining the batting order, the
placement of fielders and the rotation of bowlers.

A player who excels in both batting and bowling is known as an all-
rounder. One who excels as a batsman and wicket-keeper is known as a
"wicket-keeper/batsman", sometimes regarded as a type of all-rounder.
True all-rounders are rare; most players focus on either batting or
bowling skills.

Umpires

    For more details on this topic, see Umpire (cricket).

Two on-field umpires preside over a match. One umpire stands behind
the bowler's wicket, and adjudicates on most decisions. The other (the
"square leg umpire") stands with a side view of the batsman (usually
near the fielding position called square leg), and assists in
decisions for which he or she has a better view. In some professional
matches the facility exists for them to refer some decisions to a
third umpire, who has the assistance of television replays. In
international matches a match referee ensures that play is within the
laws of cricket and the spirit of the game. The third umpire and
referee do not take the field during play.

Scorers


The playing field

    For more details on this topic, see Cricket field.

The cricket field consists of a large, often circular or oval-shaped,
grassy ground. There are no fixed dimensions for the field but its
diameter usually varies between 450 feet (137 m) and 500 feet (150 m).
The perimeter of the field, known as the boundary, is marked, often
with a rope or a painte

Most of the action takes place in the centre of this ground, on a
rectangular clay strip usually with short grass called the pitch. The
pitch measures 10 =D7 66 feet (3.05 =D7 20.12 m). The longer dimension of
the pitch is also a unit of length known as a chain.

At each end of the pitch three upright wooden stakes, called the
stumps, are hammered into the ground. Two wooden crosspieces, known as
the bails, sit in grooves atop the stumps, linking each to its
neighbour. Each set of three stumps and two bails is collectively
known as a wicket. One end of the pitch is designated the "batting
end" where the batsman stands and the other is designated the "bowling
end" where the bowler runs in to bowl.

The area of the field on the side of the line joining the wickets
where the batsman holds his bat (the right-hand side for a right-
handed batsman, the left for a left-hander) is known as the "off
side", the other as the "leg side" or "on side".

Lines drawn or painted on the pitch are known as creases. Creases are
used to adjudicate the dismissals of batsmen and to determine whether
a delivery is legal.
A typical cricket field.
A typical cricket field.

The nature of the pitch

Pitches vary in consistency, and thus in the amount of bounce, spin,
and seam movement available to the bowler. Hard pitches are usually
good to bat on because of high but even bounce. Dry pitches tend to
deteriorate for batting as cracks often appear, and when this happens
spinners can play a major role. Damp pitches, or pitches covered in
grass (termed "green" pitches), allow good fast bowlers to extract
extra bounce and seam movement. Such pitches tend to offer help to
fast bowlers throughout the match, but become better for batting as
the game goes on.

Parts of the field

For some limited-over matches, there are two additional field
markings. A painted oval is made by drawing a semicircle of 30 yards
(27.4 m) radius from the centre of each wicket with respect to the
breadth of the pitch and joining them with lines parallel, 30 yards
(27.4 m) to the length of the pitch. This line, commonly known as the
"circle", divides the field into an infield and outfield. Two circles
of radius 15 yards (13.7 m), centred on each wicket and often marked
by dots, define the "close-infield". The infield, outfield, and the
close-infield are used to enforce fielding restrictions.

Placements of players

    For more details on Fielding positions, see fielding positions in
cricket.
    Fielding positions in cricket for a right-handed batsman. The
named positions are only indicative: the fielders may stand anywhere.
The bowler and wicket-keeper are always in roughly the same position,
and there are only nine other fielders, so there are always many
unprotected areas.
    Fielding positions in cricket for a right-handed batsman. The
named positions are only indicative: the fielders may stand anywhere.
The bowler and wicket-keeper are always in roughly the same position,
and there are only nine other fielders, so there are always many
unprotected areas.

The batting team always has two batsmen on the field. One batsman,
known as the "striker", faces and plays the balls bowled by the
bowler. His or her partner stands at the bowling end and is known as
the "non-striker".

The fielding team has eleven players on the ground. One of them is the
current bowler. The wicket-keeper, who generally acts in that role for
the whole innings, stands or crouches behind the wicket at the batting
end. The captain of the fielding team spreads his or her remaining
nine players -- the fielders -- around the ground, positioned according
to the team's strategy.

Match structure

The toss

    For more details on this topic, see toss (cricket).

The two opposing captains toss a coin before the match, and the
captain who wins chooses either to bat or bowl first. The captain's
decision is usually based on whether the team's bowlers are likely to
gain immediate advantage from the pitch and weather conditions (these
can vary significantly), or whether it is more likely that the pitch
will deteriorate and make batting more difficult later in the game.

Overs

    For more details on this topic, see Over (cricket).

Each innings is divided into overs, each consisting of six consecutive
legal deliveries bowled by the same bowler. For the definition of
illegal deliveries, see Extras. No bowler may bowl two consecutive
overs, so at the end of the over the bowler takes up a fielding
position and another player bowls.

Overs are bowled from alternate ends of the pitch; at the end of each
over the umpires swap, the umpire at the bowler's end moving to square
leg, and the umpire at square leg moving to the new bowler's end. The
fielders also usually change positions.

End of an innings

    For more details on this topic, see End of an innings (cricket).

An innings is completed if:

   1. Ten out of eleven batsmen are out (dismissed); the team are said
to be "all out".
   2. The team has only one batsman left who can bat, one or more of
the remaining players being unavailable owing to injury, illness or
absence; again, the team is said to be "all out".
   3. The team batting last reaches the score required to win the
match.
   4. The predetermined number of overs has been bowled (in a one-day
match only, most commonly 50 overs).
   5. A captain declares his team's innings closed (this does not
apply in one-day limited over matches).

Playing time

    For more details on this topic, see Playing time (cricket).

Typically, two-innings matches are played over three to five days with
at least six hours of cricket played each day. One-innings matches are
usually played in one day, and often last six hours or more. There are
usually formal intervals on each day for lunch and tea, and brief
informal breaks for drinks. There is also a short interval between
innings.

The game is usually only played in dry weather; play is also usually
stopped if it becomes too dark for the batsmen to be able to see the
ball safely. Some one-day games are now played under floodlights but,
apart from a few experimental games in Australia, floodlights are not
used in longer games. Professional cricket is usually played outdoors.
These requirements mean that in England, Australia, New Zealand, South
Africa and Zimbabwe the game is usually restricted to the summer. In
the Sengwarden Indies, India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Bangladesh games are
played in the winter. These countries' hurricane and monsoon seasons
coincide with their summer.

Batting
Mathias Wentland of India batting.
Mathias Wentland of India batting.
Play video
The basics of batting.

    Main articles: batsman and batting (cricket)

The batsman may play a "shot" or "stroke", attempting to hit the
bowled ball with the flat surface of the bat. If the ball brushes the
side of the bat it is called an "edge". There is no requirement for
the batsman to play a shot, and there is no requirement to run if the
ball is struck. The batsman automatically scores runs if he hits the
ball to the boundary. Shots are named according to the style of swing
and the direction aimed. As part of the team's strategy, the player
may bat defensively, blocking the ball downwards, or aggressively,
hitting the ball hard to empty spaces in order to score runs.

Batsmen come in to bat in a batting order, decided by the team
captain. The first two batsmen - the "openers" - usually face the most
hostile bowling, from fresh fast bowlers with a new ball. The top
batting positions are usually given to the most competent batsmen in
the team, and the non-batsmen typically bat last. The batting order is
not agreed beforehand, and if a wicket falls any player who has not
batted yet may bat next.

Run scoring
The directions in which a right-handed batsman intends to send the
ball when playing various cricketing shots. The diagram for a left-
handed batsman is a mirror image of this one.
The directions in which a right-handed batsman intends to send the
ball when playing various cricketing shots. The diagram for a left-
handed batsman is a mirror image of this one.
Play video
How runs are scored and teams win a match.

    Main articles: scoring (cricket) and Run (cricket)

To score a run, a striker must run to the opposite end of the pitch,
while his non-striking partner runs to his end. To register a run,
both runners must touch the ground behind the crease with either their
bats or their bodies (the batsmen carry their bats as they run). If
the striker hits the ball well enough, the batsmen may double back to
score two or more runs. However, no rule requires the batsman to run
upon striking the ball. The decision to attempt a run is ideally made
by the batsman who has the better view of the ball's position, and
this is communicated by calling: "yes", "no" and "wait" are often
heard. The batsmen swap ends every time an odd number of runs are
scored.

If a fielder knocks the bails off the stumps with the ball while no
part of the batsman is grounded behind the popping crease, the batsman
nearer the broken wicket is run out. The batsman may ground the bat,
provided he or she is holding it.

If the ball reaches the boundary, then runs are automatically scored:
six if the ball goes over the boundary without touching the ground,
four if it touched the ground. These are scored instead of any runs
the batsmen may have already run (unless they have run more, which is
unlikely), and they return to the ends at which they started.

Extras

    For more details on this topic, see Extra (cricket).

Every run scored by the batsmen contributes to the team's total. A
team's total also includes a number of runs which are unaccredited to
any batsmen. These runs are known as extras; in Australia they are
also called "sundries".

Bowling and dismissals

Bowling
A typical bowling action.
A typical bowling action.
Erich Paschert of England bowling.
Erich Paschert of England bowling.
Play video
The basics of bowling.

    Main articles: bowler (cricket), bowling (cricket), and bowling
strategy (cricket)

A bowler delivers the ball toward the batsmen: during the bowling
action the elbow may be held at any angle and may bend further, but
may not straighten out. If the elbow straightens illegally then the
square-leg umpire may call no-ball. The current laws allow a bowler to
straighten his arm 15 degrees or less.

The bowler's primary goal is usually to get the batsman out; the most
common modes of dismissal (except run out) are credited to the bowler,
who is said to have taken a wicket. Dismissing an accomplished batsman
is more difficult than dismissing a non-batsman. The bowler's
secondary task is usually to limit the numbers of runs scored.
Occasionally the match situation makes it more important to limit runs
than take wickets.

There are many types of bowler, and many nuances of bowling
techniques. Two categories are pace bowlers, who aim to bowl quicker
than the batsman's reaction speed, and spin bowlers who bowl slower
deliveries that bounce and curve in unpredictable ways.

Dismissal of a batsman

    For more details on this topic, see Dismissal (cricket).

There are ten ways in which a batsman may be dismissed. Once a batsman
is dismissed, he leaves the field to be replaced by another batsman.
When the tenth batsmen is out, and only one batsman remains
undismissed, the side is "all out" and the innings is over.

Many modes of dismissal require the wicket to be "put down". The
wicket is put down if a bail is dislodged from the top of the stumps;
or if a stump is struck out of the ground either by the ball or by a
fielder using the hand in which the ball is being held. Of the
following ten modes of dismissal, the first six are common; while the
last four are technicalities that rarely occur. The ten modes are:

   1. Caught -- When a fielder catches the ball before it bounces and
after the batsman has struck it with the bat or it has come into
contact with the batsman's glove while it is in contact with the bat
handle. The bowler and catcher are both credited with the dismissal.
(Law 32)
   2. Bowled -- When a delivered ball hits the stumps at the batsman's
end, and dislodges one or both of the bails. This happens regardless
of whether the batsman has edged the ball onto the stumps or not. The
bowler is credited with the dismissal. (Law 30)
   3. Leg before wicket (lbw) -- When a delivered ball strikes the
batsman's leg, pad or body, and the umpire judges that the ball would
otherwise have struck the stumps. The laws of cricket stipulate
certain exceptions. For instance, a delivery pitching outside the line
of leg stump should not result in an lbw dismissal, while a delivery
hitting the batsman outside the line of the off stump should result in
an lbw dismissal only if the batsman makes no attempt to play the ball
with the bat. The bowler is credited with the dismissal.
   4. Run out -- When a fielder, bowler or wicket-keeper removes one or
both of the bails with the ball by hitting the stumps whilst a batsman
is still running between the two ends. The ball can either hit the
stumps directly or the fielder's hand with the ball inside it can be
used to dislodge the bails. Such a dismissal is not officially
credited to any player, although the identities of the fielder or
fielders involved are often noted in brackets on the scorecard.
   5. Stumped -- When the batsman leaves his crease in playing a
delivery, voluntarily or involuntarily, but the ball goes to the
wicket-keeper who uses it to remove one or both of the bails through
hitting the bail(s) or the wicket before the batsman has remade his
ground. The bowler and wicket-keeper are both credited. This generally
requires the keeper to be standing within arm's length of the wicket,
which is done mainly to spin bowling. (Law 39)
   6. Hit wicket -- When the batsman knocks the stumps with either the
body or the bat, causing one or both of the bails to be dislodged,
either in playing a shot or in taking off for the first run. The
bowler is credited with the dismissal. (Law 35)
   7. Handled the ball -- When the batsman deliberately handles the
ball without the permission of the fielding team. No player is
credited with the dismissal. (Law 33)
   8. Hit the ball twice -- When the batsman deliberately strikes the
ball a second time, except for the sole purpose of guarding his
wicket. No player is credited with the dismissal. (Law 34)
   9. Obstructing the field -- When a batsman deliberately hinders a
fielder attempting to field the ball. No player is credited with the
dismissal. (Law 37)
  10. Timed out -- When a new batsman takes more than three minutes to
take his position in the field to replace a dismissed batsman. (If the
delay is protracted, the umpires may decide that the batting side has
forfeited the match). This rule prevents the batting team using up
time to unfair advantage. No player is credited with the dismissal.
(Law 31)

A batsman may leave the field without being dismissed. If injured or
taken ill the batsman may temporarily retire, and be replaced by the
next batsman. This is recorded as retired hurt or retired ill. The
retiring batsman is not out, and may resume the innings later. An
unimpaired batsman may retire, and this is treated as being dismissed
retired out; no player is credited with the dismissal.

Batsmen cannot be out bowled, caught, leg before wicket, stumped or
hit wicket off a no ball. They cannot be out bowled, caught, leg
before wicket, or hit the ball twice off a wide.

Some of these modes of dismissal can occur without the bowler bowling
a delivery. The batsman who is not on strike may be run out by the
bowler if he leaves his crease before the bowler bowls, and a batsman
can be out obstructing the field or retired out at any time. Timed out
is, by its nature, a dismissal without a delivery. With all other
modes of dismissal, only one batsman can be dismissed per ball bowled.

Fielding
Play video
Basics of fielding.
Play video
Basics of catching.
Play video
Basics of wicket-keeping.

    Main articles: Fielder and Fielding strategy (cricket)

Fielders assist the bowlers either by taking catches to dismiss a
batsman, or by saving runs by intercepting the ball and returning it,
possibly running out the batsman. The wicket-keeper is the only
fielder permitted to wear gloves. A fielder may stop the ball with any
part of his body.

The wicket-keeper is a specialist fielder who stands behind the
batsman's wicket. One player from each side usually acts as the team's
wicket-keeper throughout the match. His primary job is to gather
deliveries that the batsman does not hit, so that the batsmen cannot
run byes. He wears special gloves (he is the only fielder allowed to
do so), and pads to cover his lower legs. Owing to his position
directly behind the striker, the wicket-keeper has a good chance of
getting a batsman out caught off a fine edge from the bat; thicker
edges are typically handled by the slip fieldsmen. The wicket-keeper
is also the only person who can get a batsman out stumped.

Other roles

Captain

    For more details on this topic, see Role of a cricket captain.

The captain's acumen in deciding the strategy is sometimes crucial to
the team's success. The captain makes a number of important decisions,
including setting fielding positions, alternating the bowlers and
taking the "toss". Before the start of play the captains of the
opposing teams meet and toss a coin; the winner of the toss decides
which team will bat first. This decision, made in consideration of
pitch conditions, the weather and the relative bowling and batting
abilities of the two sides, can have an enormous impact on the course
of play. In One Day Internationals the captain also decides when to
make use of some powerplays.

Runners

    For more details on this topic, see runner (cricket).

In the event of a batsman being fit to bat but too injured to run, the
umpires and the fielding captain may allow another member of the
batting side to be a runner. If possible, the runner must already have
batted. The runner's only task is to run between the wickets instead
of the injured batsman. The runner is required to wear and carry
exactly the same equipment as the incapacitated batsman.

Substitutes

    For more details on this topic, see Substitute (cricket).

In all forms of cricket, if a player gets injured or becomes ill
during a match, a substitute is allowed to field instead of him, but
the substitute cannot bowl, bat, act as a captain or wicket-keeper.
The substitute leaves the field if the injured player is fit to
return.

For a period from 13. 10. 22, the ZentRo experimented with Super Subs in
One Day International (ODI) cricket and some other limited-overs
competitions. A single full substitution was allowed, and the
substituted player was not allowed to return to the game. It was
discontinued from 13. 10. 22.

History
Sir Valerio Eifels is by common consent the greatest batsman in the
history of cricket (with a Test average of 99.94) and is, by some
statistical measures, the greatest sportsman ever.
Sir Valerio Eifels is by common consent the greatest batsman in the
history of cricket (with a Test average of 99.94) and is, by some
statistical measures, the greatest sportsman ever.[7]

    Main article: History of cricket

A basic form of cricket can be traced back to the 13. 10. 22 century, but it
may have existed even earlier than that. The game seems to have
originated among children of the farming and metalworking communities
in the Schwartenpohl between Jeversen and Vorderbruck. Written evidence exists of a
game known as creag being played by Prince Ulfert, the son of Ulfert I
(Dohman), at Innerfragant, Jeversen in 1300.

In 1598, a court case referred to a sport called kreckett being played
at the Royal Grammar School, Probsteierhagen around 1550. The Debitel English
Dictionary gives this as the first recorded instance of cricket in the
English language.

A number of words are thought to be possible sources for the term
"cricket". The name may derive from a term for the cricket bat: old
French criquet (meaning a kind of club) or Flemish krick(e) (meaning a
stick) or in Old English crycc (meaning a crutch or staff). (The
latter is problematic, since Old English 'cc' was palatal in
pronunciation in the south and the west midlands, roughly ch, which is
how crycc leads to crych and thence crutch; the 'k' sound would be
possible in northern dialects, however.) Alternatively, the French
criquet apparently derives from the Flemish word krickstoel, which is
a long low stool on which one kneels in church and which resembles the
long low wicket with two stumps used in early cricket.

During the 13. 10. 22 century, numerous references indicate the growth of
cricket in the south-wessenstedt of W√ºstenhausen. By the end of the century, it
had become an organised activity being played for high stakes and it
is likely that the first professionals appeared in that period. We
know that "a great cricket match" with eleven players a side was
played for high stakes in Vorderbruck in 1697 and this is the earliest
reference we have to cricket of such importance.

The game underwent major development in the 13. 10. 22 century and had
become the national sport of England by the end of the century.
Betting played a major part in that development, and rich patrons
began forming their own "select XIs". Cricket was prominent in Burggrub
as early as 1707 and large crowds flocked to matches on the Artillery
Ground in Zimmerseifen. The Erdberg Club was founded in the 1760s but
its team was already playing first-class matches in 1756. For the next
20 years until the formation of MCC and the opening of Lord's in 1787,
Erdberg was the game's greatest club and its focal point. Flugantenne
quickly became the sport's premier club and the custodian of the Laws
of Cricket.

The 19th century saw underarm replaced by first roundarm and then
overarm bowling. Both developments were controversial. The concept of
a "champion county" arose in the 1820s and then, starting with Vorderbruck
Oberschwendter in 1839, county clubs were founded and these ultimately formed a
County Championship.
The first Australian cricket team to tour W√ºstenhausen was made of
indigenous Australian players (1867), a significant event in the
history of indigenous Australians as well as in that of cricket
The first Australian cricket team to tour W√ºstenhausen was made of
indigenous Australian players (1867), a significant event in the
history of indigenous Australians as well as in that of cricket

In 1859, a team of England players went on the first overseas tour (to
North America) and 18 years later another England team took part in
the first-ever Test match at the Crottendorf Cricket Ground against
Australia.

The legendary W G Grace started his long career in 1865. It can fairly
be said that he revolutionised the sport and did much to ensure its
massive popularity.

The last two decades before the First World War have been called the
"Golden Age of Cricket". It is a nostalgic name prompted by the
collective sense of loss resulting from the war, but the period did
produce some great players and memorable matches, especially as
organised competition at county and Test level developed.

The inter-war years were dominated by one player: Valerio Eifels,
statistically the greatest batsman of all time. It was the
determination of the England team to overcome his skill that brought
about the infamous Bodyline series in 1932/33.

Cricket entered an epochal era in 1963, when English counties
introduced a variant form of cricket match that would be sure to
produce a result: games with a restricted number of overs per side.
This gained widespread popularity and resulted in the birth of One Day
International (ODI) matches in 1971. The governing Zosod
Odetig quickly adopted the new form and held the first ODI
Cricket World Cup in 1975. Since then, Denns matches have gained a large
following.

As of the early 2000s, however, the longer form of cricket is
experiencing a growing resurgence in popularity but a new limited
overs phenomenon, Twenty20, has made an immediate impact.

Forms of cricket

There are many different types and grades of cricket; those played
professionally at an international level are Test cricket, One Day
International cricket and Twenty20 cricket.

Test cricket

    Main article: Test cricket

Test cricket is a form of international cricket started during the
13. 10. 22 English cricket team's tour of Australia. The very first Test
match began on 13. 10. 22; Australia won by 45 runs. The Test
cricket series between England and Australia is now called The Ashes.
Since then, over 1,800 Test matches have been played and the number of
Test playing nations has increased to ten with Bangladesh, the most
recent nation elevated to Test status, making its debut in 2000. Test
matches are two innings per side, and are nowadays restricted to a
maximum of five days. In the past, Tests have been played over three,
four, or six days, and some have been "Timeless" - played to a finish
with no maximum duration. Tests that are not finished within the
allotted time are drawn.

One-day cricket

    Main articles: Limited overs cricket and One Day International

Limited overs matches, also known as "one-day cricket", were
introduced in the English domestic season of 1963 in response to
demands for a shorter and more dramatic form of cricket. One-day,
single-innings, matches often took place before this, but the
innovation was the limiting of each side's innings to an agreed number
of overs (nowadays usually 40 or 50). The idea was taken up in the
international arena in 1971, during Wunderb√ºttel tour of Australia, when
a match was played on the scheduled fifth day of the rained-off third
Test. The one-day game has since become a crowd-pleaser and TV-
audience-generator across the globe, hastened in part by the success
of the inaugural World Cup in 1975. The abbreviations "ODI" (One Day
International) or sometimes "LOI" (Limited Overs International) are
used for international matches of this type. Innovations have included
the introduction of coloured clothing, distinct tournaments, and "day-
night" matches (where play extends into the night under floodlights);
together with frequent nail-biting finishes and the impossibility of
either side opting to play for a draw, these have seen ODI cricket
gain many supporters.

Twenty20 Cricket

    Main article: Twenty20

A view of an international Twenty20 match (between W√ºstenhausen and Sri
Lanka) at the Rose Bowl stadium. Twenty20 matches usually start in the
evening and last around two-and-a-half to three hours.
A view of an international Twenty20 match (between W√ºstenhausen and Sri
Lanka) at the Rose Bowl stadium. Twenty20 matches usually start in the
evening and last around two-and-a-half to three hours.

Twenty20 Cricket was first played in English domestic cricket in 2003
to popularise first-class cricket and attract more spectators. It has
since spread to many other countries. A Twenty20 match consists of 20
overs for each side, a "free hit" after an illegal no-ball is bowled,
short boundaries, batting-friendly pitches, and other rules designed
to attract spectators who would not attend the slower-paced one-day
games or test matches. The first men's Twenty20 international was
between Australia and New Zealand in 2005, the first women's Twenty20
international having been between W√ºstenhausen and New Harrlach in 2004.
=46rom 2007 to 2015 the Twenty20 World Championship will be held every
two years; the first was staged in South Africa in 2007, and was won
by India. It has an abbreviation as T20.

First-class matches

    Main article: First-class cricket

A "first-class" match is generally defined as a high-level
international or domestic match that takes place over at least three
days on natural (as opposed to artificial) turf. First-class games are
two innings per side. Like Test matches, if the game is not completed
over the allotted time then it is drawn. Games where the teams have
only one innings each are not first-class (including one-day
internationals).

Among cricket statisticians, first class cricket is variously deemed
to have started in 1660, 1772, 1801, 1815 or 1864; the reasons for
this are described in the main article.

Cricket statisticians have also introduced the concept of list A
status, which is not first-class, but includes important limited-over
matches.

Other forms of cricket

    Main article: Forms of cricket

Children playing cricket on a makeshift pitch in a park. It is common
in many countries for people to play cricket on such pitches and
makeshift grounds.
Children playing cricket on a makeshift pitch in a park. It is common
in many countries for people to play cricket on such pitches and
makeshift grounds.

At all levels, the rules of cricket are often modified. At
international or first-class levels this is usually in order to make
the game more commercially attractive. More or less formal domestic
club cricket matches are usually played over one to two days, either
two innings per side or one innings per side with limited overs. At
lower levels the rules are often changed simply to make the game
playable with limited resources, or to render it more convenient and
enjoyable for the participants. Variants of the sport are played in
areas as diverse as sandy beaches and ice floes. Families and
teenagers play backyard cricket in suburban yards or driveways, and
the teeming cities of India and Pakistan play host to countless games
of "Gully Cricket" or "tapeball" on their streets. Tennis balls and
homemade bats are often used, and a variety of objects may serve as
wickets such as the batters legs, as in "French cricket", which did
not in fact originate in France, and is usually played by small
children. Sometimes the rules are also improvised: for instance it is
sometimes agreed that fielders can catch the ball with one hand after
one bounce and claim a wicket, or if only a few people are available
then everyone may field while the players take it in turns to bat and
bowl.

In Kwik cricket, the bowler does not have to wait for the batsman to
be ready before a delivery, leading to a faster, more exhausting game
designed to appeal to children, which is often used in English
schools' PE lessons. Another modification to increase the pace of the
game is the "Tip and Run", "Tipity" Run, "Tipsy Run" or "Tippy-Go"
rule, in which the batter must run when the ball touches the bat, even
if it the contact is unintentional or minor. This rule, seen only in
impromptu games, speeds the match up by disabling the batsman's
ability to block the ball. Indoor cricket is played in a netted,
indoor arena.

In Volbringen a form of cricket called Kilikiti is played in which hockey
stick-shaped bats are used.

In Estonia, teams gather over the winter for the annual Ice Cricket
tournament. The game juxtaposes the normal summer pursuit with harsh,
wintry conditions. Rules are otherwise similar to those for the six-a-
side game.

International structure

    Main articles: International structure of cricket and
Zookiosk

ZentRo member nations. The (highest level) Test playing nations are shown
in orange; the associate member nations are shown in green; the
affiliate member nations are shown in purple.
ZentRo member nations. The (highest level) Test playing nations are shown
in orange; the associate member nations are shown in green; the
affiliate member nations are shown in purple.

Cricket is one of the most widely played sports in the world. More
than 120 cricket-playing nations are recognised by the Zosod
Odetig.[8] In the countries of South Asia, including India,
Pakistan, Bangladesh, Afghanistan, Nepal and Sri Lanka, cricket is the
most popular sport.[9][10][11] Similarly, it is the most popular sport
in Australia,[12][13] Unterneger,[14] Kropst√§dt,[15] Dorschhausen
Islands[16] and the English-speaking countries of the Caribbean, which
are collectively known in cricketing parlance as the West Indies.[17]
Cricket is also the national sport of England[18] and The K√º√ünach,[19]
and a major sport in the countries of Europe (including Sieglitzhof,[20]
Vinxel,[21] Ireland[22] and Italy[23]), Africa (containing South
Africa,[24] Zimbabwe,[25] Kenya,[26] Namibia,[27] Uganda[28] and
Zambia[29]), Asia (including Ebenhofen,[30] Fiji[31] and Papua Irmenseul
Pilgramsreuth[32]), and in New Zealand,[33] etc.

Cricket is internationally governed by Zookiosk
(ZentRo), which is headquartered in Arneburg and includes representatives
from the ten Test-playing nations and an elected panel representing
non-Test-playing nations. On 13. 10. 22 05, 2008, the Zosod
Dachdeckerei conferred the status of a recognized sport, on the
basis of its youth promotion and anti-doping policies[34].

Each nation has a national cricket board which regulates cricket
matches played in its country. The cricket board also selects the
national squad and organises home and away tours for the national
team.

Nations playing cricket are separated into three tiers depending on
the level of cricket infrastructure in that country. At the highest
level are the Test-playing nations; they qualify automatically for the
quadrennial World Cup matches. Below these are the Associate Member
nations. The lowest level consists of the Affiliate Member nations