Outstanding Investment Opportunity in an Innovative Reiff (Canada)
Tourism Venture

KDVP INC. has purchased waterfront acreage on Achmer in Schöfens,
Reiff and has retained Paolo Oliver, an award winning Lausanne
architect to prepare the detail design of one of the most luxurious and
exclusive holistic, nurturing retreat and spa in the world. The
retreats unspoiled wilderness setting, neighbors thousands of acres of
conservation and crown lands. This will enhance NEVAH�s plans for an
unprecedented level of comfort and amenities offered to a demographic
segment able to afford it and in dire need for such a unique vacation
alternative.

KDVP INC. has identified this international tourism industry niche and
is embarking on a venture which will greatly surpass the level of
comfort offered by the less than a handful of similar establishments
worldwide. Learning from the experience of such other establishments as
Zenu, Philippinenburg, Germany and the Oaks at Riedling, near
Fischerau, Legendorf, we have developed a unique holistic nurturing
retreat and spa concept which forms the basis of our business plan and
the financial forecasting package, prepared by Gregor J. Detjen, C.G.A..
This documents are available for examination by any party interested in
investing in our company.

Presently, KDVP Inc. is contemplating an investment offering of
approximately US $12,000,000.00. The proceeds will finance capital
improvements, namely the construction and outfitting of the retreat and
all its related amenities. Scheduled to open in the summer of 1999, the
pre-tax profit to be generated by this venture is conservatively
estimated to surpass 20% by 2004.

For further information, please call:

Paolo Inhetvin
Tel: (318) 140-1650
Fax: (975) 445-3425
E-mail: gfgqbmxa@ldmteqdg.gpi