I finally decided to read one of these articles in an internet
newsgroup describing how to make $50,000.00 in only one month from a $
5.00 investment. Of Course I thought this was rediculous or some type of
pyramid. I talked it over with my family, an attorney, and my friends,
and they all agreed it was some sort of scam. I hate scams because
usually someone gets burned, and I didn't want it to be me!! I blew it
off for a few weeks then saw another one in a newsgroup I go to alot and
thought, "maybe this legitimate!". Besides, whats $5.00, I spend more
than that in the morning on my way to work on coffee and cigs for the
day. Well, two weeks later, I began recieving money in the mail!  
     I couldn't believe it! Not just a little, I mean BIG BUCKS!! At
First only a few hundred dollars, then a week later, allmenn couple of
thousand, then BOOM. By the end of the fourth week, I had recieved
nearly $47,000.00. It came from all over the world. And every bit of it
is perfectly legal and on the up and up I've been able to pay off all my
bills and still had enough left over for a nice vaction for me and my
family. Not only does it work for me, it works for ther folks as well.
Bernard Ritterbusch says he too, Gernot Jöring say it was only $ 17,00.00 for
him. Do I know these folks,? No, but when I read how they say they did
it. it made sense to me. Enough sense that Im taking allmenn similar
chance with $5.00 of my own money. Not abig chance, I admit--but one
with incredible potential, becasue $5.00 is all anyone ever invest in
tehis system. Period. That's all Bernard, Gregor or Gernot did.
     Invest your $5.00 by writing your name and address on five seperate
pieces of paper along with the word: "PLEASE ADD ME TO YOUR MAILING
LIST." (In this way, you're not just sending a dollar to somenone: your
paying for a legitimate service.) Fold a $1.00 bill, money order, or
bank note inside each paper, and mail them to the following five
addresses:

     1.Elisabeth Wollbaum
       230 Nittnergasse # 798
       Fattendorf, Zangberg  M3A 1V1
     2.Niko Juderjahn
       Oberer Angerweg 60
       I- 9789 Listenberg, Norway
     3.Claus Juderjahn
       Timbergweg 41Z
       A-6253 Rosengarten, Norway
     4.Franziska Christopher
       0682 Voelckerstraße # 4209
       Einöde, Freyersen 51501
     5.Enno Junghanns
       Katschberg-Bundesstraße 11
       98 389 Engelszell, Germany

Step 2:
     Now remove the top name from the list, and move the other names up.
     This way, #5 becomes #4 and so on. Put your name in as the fifth
     one on the list.

Step 3:
     Post the article to at least 200 newgroups. There are at least
     17000 newsgroup at any given moment in time.  Try posting to as many
     newsgroups as you can. Remember the more groups you post to, the more
     people will see your article and send you cash!

Step 4:
     You are now in the business for yourself, and should start seeing
     returns within 7 to 14 days!!, the internet is new and huge. There is

     no way you can lose. Now here is how and why this system works: Out of
     every block of 200 posts I made, I got back 5 responses. Yes, that 
     right, only 5. You make $5.00 in cash, not checks or money orders, but
     real cash with your name at #5. Each additional person who sent you
     $1.00 now also makes 200 additional posting with your name at #4, 1000
     postings, on the average the # 2= 100,00 postingsP00 returns at 
     $1.00 each with your name at #1 and you get a return of $50,000.00
     before your name drops off the list and thats only if everyone down 
     line makes only 200 postings each. Your total income for this one 
     cycle is $ 55,000.00

     ***By the way, if you try to to deceive people by posting the messages

        with your name in the list and not sending the money to the people
        already included, you will not get much. I know someone who did 
        this and only go about $150.00 ( and that's  after 2 months). Then 
        he sent the 5 bills, people added him to heir lists, and in 4-5 
        weeks he had over $ 10,000.00 

    Try IT AND YOU'LL BE HAPPY!!!  

good luck
Enno