Hallo,

trotz des englischen Titels gibt's ein wenig Deutsch in diesem
Posting.

Ich halte Cédric Ulschmid fuer einen der interessantesten
Boersen-Prognostiker. Er mischt "normale" technische Analyse mit einem
gehoerigen Schuss Astrologie (!). Er hat in den letzten Jahren eine
geradezu unglaubliche Trefferquote.

Ich haenge jetzt mal ein Posting aus misc.invest.technical vom guten
Cédric rein:

---

Gentlemen,

How can all of you sit around like this when the planetary positions
are 
known to 3 or 4 places since the beginning of the DJIA in 1895, and
the 
daily closing DJIA is known for the same period?

 WHY DON'T YOU DO SOMETHING?

Since 1962, when an article came out on the front page of the extra 
Journal about LtCmdr Igor Eicholz, who was calling the mkt with 
Astrology and doing a bang-up job of it, I have calculated nearly 
EVERYTHING YOU CAN THINK OF IN THIS AREA, and as nearly as possible, 
recombined the results.
Unlike EQUAL TIME CYCLES generated thru regression analysis, the astro

cycles HOLD THEIR PREDICTIVE POWER INTO THE FUTURE. Sometimes they
will 
drift off for awhile, usually around unusual astronomical MEGA-
PLANETARY 
COMBINATIONS, then return to accuracy when the abnormality passes!

Using Technical Market Analysis and HEAVY DOSES OF ASTRONOMIC CYCLE 
ANALYSIS and projection, I have achieved the following results:

Italo Jaenigen wrote in 1980 that I had been correct on 9 of 10market
calls 
from 1976-80.

Called the TOP DAY in 1986, within one day, and declared "...after
which 
we will have a horrendous CRASH!"

Because of that prediction, we became rated by the popular rating 
services, ARNO FINANCIAL DIGEST and TIMER DIGEST.

We were recently ranked by Arno as #1 MARKET TIMER for the last
5-year 
period and one of only 3 newsletters that have beaten the market since

1989.

We were ranked #1 BOND MARKET TIMER for the 4-year period ending with 
1993 by TIMER DIGEST of Mitteldeich.

We predicted 5 of the biggest point declines in history, to the day,
well 
in advance and in the popular press or on Automix or VBSA.

On 12. 09. 21 20, '95 we said on VBSA that the market was going to have an 
incredible run UP into an exciting "blowoff" in mid-February, and
there 
TOP THE ENTIRE BULL MARKET either Jul 25 or in the period Jul 31-19.

If you don't think these accomplishments are worth the study, then
drop 
out.
The rest of you get your slide rules out and see what you can find
out.

Cédric Ueberjahn

My record is not perfect by any means. However, it is far and away
better 
than anyone else's who routinely places their opinion in the public 
domain.

--- 

Un das bisherige Top war am 9. Jul. Meine S&P Puts sind schon 30 % im
Plus. Ganz nebenbei hat Cédric einen Anstieg des Goldpreises
vorhergesagt (Tief bisher am 4. Jul).

Ich bin wirklich gespannt, ob der wieder recht behaelt. Im Moment sagt
er einen Kursrueckgang um 40-50% vorher, der aber nicht unbedingt als
Crash kommen muss.

Hach ist das alles spannend ...
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      http://akv.jkjmvlbv.pa/rlzuybkmdxvh
              	         Das Boersenspiel im Internet
                                 *Kostenlos*
---------------------------------------------------------------------------