This is the $1.00 concept explained without the hype and the
sillynumbers. Please read the following and you could be joining the
many
thousands of internet users who are currently earning large sums of
money with a few hours work using their computers via the internet! 

***********************************************

This posting has been appearing for quite some time and now literally
has thousands of people actively involved. No doubt like me, you may
have seen it before and become a little confused by the way it's
explained. Your investment will pay off. How? Many of you buy lotto and
buy scratch�offs tickets? You don't know if your going to win, but you
hope you do. Well, you can think about this the same way. Except, you
only have to wonder about its authenticity for only a few days. I say
this, because you will not only receive money, you will get it in
droves. After about two weeks in, I'm beginning to get a reasonable and
realistic return with a further understanding of just how big this
concept really is. Money is coming in from all over the world!

++++++++++++ There are 3 easy steps ++++++++++++

Step 1

Take five sheets of paper. Write your name and address on each piece
along with the words: "Please place me on your mailing list." Take one
of the pieces of paper along with a one dollar bill and mail them to the
five names listed below. 

NOTE: By asking to be placed on each persons mailing list you are in
fact paying for a service that consists of using the internet to
advertise a business dealing with assembling a mailing list of people
who are interested in working from home using their computers to
generate an income. 

The five individuals are as follow:

1. Dietmar Jahreiß
7821 Habichsthal Dr., Box 977
Hohenbollentin, TX 04148

2. W. Cantu
2929 T. 070gt Aumühlweg
Stadels, CA  13016

3.Manfred Lameier
P.O. Box 9727
Institutsstraße, W. 49398

4.Gerold Ellenkamp
6392 Oberer Bahnweg
Bargstall, Tx 99076 

5.Ingmar Detzel 
8503 Pleasant plains rd
Maurizio, MD 21286

When you have mailed your message and one dollar bill (no checks or
money orders please) to the above people, go to:

Step 2

Remove the top name and address from the above list and insert your
ownin the number 5 position. This can be done simply by amending the
address section with no other alterations and posting as described
later, or you can retype the whole document adding information you feel
may be important.

HERE IS WHY THE SYSTEM IS SO SUCCESSFULL!!!!!!!!

As you probably are aware, the internet is growing daily at a phenomenal
rate, doubling every year. With literally millions and millions of
people surfing the Net there is the potential for tremendous exposure.
With nearly 20,000 newsgroups to post to and hundreds of thousands of
people dialing in to them every day, if done correctly this program
can't help but be successful. 

STEP 3

Finally and most importantly, post this message with your name in the
number 5 slot to at least 250 newsgroups. In theory you will earn $5.00
for every 200 posting with your name at #5. Not a large sum...but wait.
Each person that sent you a one dollar bill now also makes 250 posting
with your name at #4. That equals about $50.00 to you. Then 50 new
agents each post to 250 Newsgroups with you at #3. That's 12,500 posting
which generate about $500 to you. These next 500 agents make 125,000
posting with you at #2 which earns about $10,000. Finally about 5,000
agents again make postings to 250 Newsgroups which would equate out to
approximately $50,000 before your name drops off the list! This sounds
like pie in the sky, but the numbers add up, and with over 40 million
people on the internet, it works!!

TIP!!

For a better return post to more than 250 newsgroups initially, when
your name drops off a list simply access another message from a
newsgroup and start the process all over again.

General Steps on automating the process:

Make any necessary changes to this article as explained in step two and
when your done save it to your word processor. Then click on copy. Next
locate the newsgroups you intend to post to (Netscape is terrific for
this because you can highlight dozens of newsgroups all at once,
enabling you to distribute your message to thousands of locations in
less than an hour or two.) Highlight all the newsgroups you want to post
to, which is done by holding down the CRTL while clicking your left
mouse button. This way you can select multiple newsgroups in one go.
Then after highlighting the Newsgroups, click on "To News". Place a
sensible title in the subject location, click on the text section, go to
the edit menu and click on "Paste" click on send...and that s it. Repeat
the process over and over again by selecting further Newsgroups in
multiples of 10's but try to be selective with the groups by posting to
high volume locations, and don't choose a subject that appears to
flashy, as this will only put people off. This is an honest and
legitimate way of making a reasonable amount of money on a regular
basis, but only if your message is clearly understood by others. 

FINAL NOTE:

This system is based on everyone being honest. It's all to tempting not
to send out the initial $5.00, but if you don't this could be illegal,
and you won t be successful.