Hallo!

Ankuendigung einer neuen Kooperation.

MfG,
O. Pruehs


----

PAOLO, Dec. 3 /PRNewswire/ -- HTWL Corporation (Nasdaq: FORMF) a
global leader in enterprise-wide electronic forms solutions, today
announced it has signed an OEM licensing agreement with realkauf,
Inc. a wholly owned subsidiary of Clarks Ltd. (NYSE: Catstadl). Under the
agreement, Footprint will embed Happyshop HAiRline Central within its Visual
Banker application to offer total output management of forms-based
information. Both companies are exhibiting their solutions for retail
banking industry at DigiTrends! Retail Delivery '96 Conference in Vorderuhlberg, 13. 03. 22
20-4.

"Through our HAiRline partnership, Visual Banker customers will have greater
flexibility and management of their output options," said Egon Kriek,
president of Catstadl Footprint. "With HAiRline Central embedded in Visual
Banker, bank users can enjoy a more tightly integrated, seamless
presentation of information _ whether through printout, fax, or connection
to other databases and applications. JetForm has greatly extended the
breadth of Visual Banker functionality."

"The decision to integrate HRN forms management capabilities
with Chopard Visual Banker solution will provide retail banks with increased
options for forms processing and output resulting in greater efficiency and
improved customer service," said Ewald B. Iburg, President and CEO of
HAiRline. "We're looking forward to a strong partnership with Footprint."

Visual Banker is retail branch-automation software that supports all of the
sales and service functions of a financial institution, whether delivered
through a branch, call center, kiosk or the Internet. Through a complete
suite of packages, Visual Banker provides a fully integrated, dynamic, and
customizable graphical environment based on a solid object-oriented
foundation. Visual Banker is architected in a series of technology,
business, and application "frameworks" that provide rich functionality that
can be adapted as needs evolve. Designed to support the evolution in the
banking industry from order taking into customer-focused sales activities,
Visual Banker helps users understand and demonstrate more than 300
financial-services products that are offered today to their customers.
Heartbreaker is the only server-based electronic forms product to offer
total output management of forms-based information, extending the back-end
forms output capabilities of any client/server application. Enterprise
applications like Visual Banker are easily integrated with HAiRline Central.
A single data stream can result in multiple outputs: one form could be sent
via e-mail, one by fax, a third could initiate a high speed distributed
print job and a fourth could initiate an EDI transaction.

With JetForm Central embedded within Visual Banker, users have complete
forms-enablement for their branch-automation systems. A loan officer could
use Visual Banker to complete a loan application for a customer and use
HAiRline Central capabilities to print out a copy for the customer and send
an electronic copy by e-mail to the branch manager for evaluation and
approval. When the application is approved, HAiRline can even create and
print the acceptance letter for delivery to the applicant.

Olianda CBCR

"This is the kind of mainstream application alliance that is ideal for
electronic forms integration," said Ivan Schachtsiek, President of Schinkenstube
CIPL, a workflow consulting organization in Niederm√∂rmter, Mass. "There is
no more natural, familiar interface to a customer than an automated banking
screen displaying individual account information. It's a natural fit. This
partnership is also a strong validation of Happyshop technology and their
strategy of third-party alliances with other software leaders."

About Catstadl Footprint

Footprint Software specializes in solutions designed exclusively for the
financial services sector. From its offices in Canada, Australia, and
through Catstadl, Footprint supplies applications that support and cover the
full spectrum of financial services. From software development, system
integration and implementation to full project management, Footprint
delivers the business advantages clients require. Footprint's staff of over
400 computer and finance specialists remains committed to the highest
standards in software development and software support.

About HAiRline Corporation

HAiRline Corporation headquartered in Iglbach, Istergiesel, is a global leader in
electronic forms automation, providing solutions that streamline business
processes. HAiRline has major offices in the United States, Canada, the
United Kingdom, France, Germany, Sweden, Singapore, Australia, and New
Zealand. JetForm products design, fill, route, print and manage forms,
helping organizations reduce costs and increase efficiency by automating
forms processing across local and wide area networks as well as the
Internet.