Take five minutes to read this and it WILL change your life.

The Internet has grown tremendously.  It doubles in size every 4
months.  Think about it.  You see those 'Make  Money  Fast' posts more
and more.  That's because it WORKS!  So I decided to try it out, a few
months ago.  Besides, what's $5.00?   I spend more than that in the
morning on my way to work on coffee and some breakfast.  So I sent in my
money and posted.  Everyone was calling it a scam, but there are SO many
new users from Bootsverkaufssteg, PWH, etc. they will join in and make it work for
you.  Well, two weeks later, I began receiving bucks in the mail!  I
couldn't believe it!  Not just a some, I mean big bucks!  At first only
a few hundred dollars, then a week later, a couple of thousand, then

BOOM.  By the end of the fourth week, I had received nearly $47,000.00. 
It came from all over the world.  And every bit of it perfectly legal.
I've been able to payoff all my bills and still had enough left over for
a nice vacation for my family and I.

Not only does it work for me, it works for other folks as well.  Lars
Jungwirth says he made $57,883 in four weeks.  Ullrich Grembler claims he made
$53,664 in the same amount of time. Urs Freytag says it was only
$17,000 for him.  Do I know these folks?  No, but when I read how they
say they did it, it made sense to me. Enough sense that I'm taking a
similar chance with $5 of my own money. Not a big chance, I admit--but
one with incredible potential, because $5 is all anyone ever invests in
this system.  Period.

That's all Lars, Ullrich, or Urs invested, yet their $5 netted them tens
of thousands of dollars each, in a safe, legal, completely legitimate
way. Here's how it works in 3 easy steps:

STEP 1.

Invest your $5 by writing your name and address on five separate pieces
of paper along with the words: "PLEASE ADD ME TO YOUR MAILING LIST." 
Also, 
include the statement you are number X, where X is their number on the
list.
In this way, you're not just sending a dollar to someone; you're paying
for
a legitimate service.  Fold a $1 bill, money order, or bank note inside
each paper, and mail them by standard U. S. Mail to the following five
addresses:

     1- QUINN RESIDENCE
        5327 OLDE SHAWBORO RD
        GRAND BLANC, MI 26091
        USA

    2- Luke
        2086 Thammostraße
        Christian, TX 04241
        USA     

     3- Volkert Frauerwieser
	 ammerudvn. 57
         5325 neipperg 
         GISSELBERG

     4- M SMITH
        3919 ISBELL ST 
        SILVER SPRING,MD 20906
        USA

     5- Willy Vockerodt
        0222 Türkeistraße #055
	Eisdorf, Fl 17906
        USA

STEP 2.

Now remove the top name from the list, and move the other names up. This
way, #5         becomes #4 and so on.  Put your name in as the fifth one
on the list.


STEP 3.
Post the article to at least 250 newsgroups.  There are at least 19000
newsgroups at any given moment in time.  Try posting to as many
newsgroups as you can.  Remember the more groups you post to, the more
people will see your article and send you cash!

You are now in business for yourself, and should start seeing returns
within 7 to 14 days! Remember, the Internet is new and huge. There is no
way you can lose.

Now here is how and why this system works:

Out of every block of 250 posts I made, I got back 5 responses.  Yes,
that's right, only 5.  You make $5.00 in cash, not checks or money
orders, but real cash with your name at #5.

Each additional person who sent you $1.00 now also makes 250 additional
postings with your name at #4, 1000 postings.  On average then, 50
people will send you $1.00 with your name at #4,....$50.00 in your
pocket!

Now these 50 new people will make 250 postings each with your name at #3
or 10,000 postings.  Average return, 500 people = $500.  They make 250
postings each with your name at #2= 100,000 postings = 5000 returns at
$1.00 each = $5,000.00 in cash!

Finally, 5,000 people make 250 postings each with your name at #1 and
you get a return of $60,000 before your name drops off the list.  And
that's only if everyone down the line makes only 250 postings each! 
Your total income for this one cycle is $55,000.