Roulettesystem Tarzan Roulette SelMckenzie Schwetzler
Author B.Schwetzler
Video http://bko.szefkkg.pao/qkiwf?o=wuY7qfC4tDZ


This is an "original" system by Schwetzler. It has never been
published before. Using $1 chips, you can expect to profit $60 an
hour. Losing sessions are very rare. (About two per thousand spins).
The system Two bets are made on every spin: Low (1-18) and the 3rd
Dozen (25-36). The 1 - 18 bet on the outside of the roulette table
covers the numbers 1 to 18. This bet pays even money, meaning that a
$1 bet pays $1 if any of the numbers 1 to 18 come up on the next spin.
The 3rd Dozen or 3rd 12 bet on the outside of the roulette table
covers the numbers 25 to 36. This bet pays two to one, meaning that a
$1 bet pays $2 if any of the numbers 25 to 36 come up on the next
spin. The amount of chips placed on each bet is important. You must
put 3 chips on 1 - 18 and 2 chips on the 3rd dozen. Doing so If 1 to
18 comes up, you win 3 chips on 1-18 and lose 2 chips on 25 to 36, for
a profit of 1 chip. If 25 to 36 comes up, you win 4 chips on that bet
and lose 3 chips on 1-18 for a profit of 1 chip. Placing the Two Bets
Together, 1-18 and the 3rd Dozen, you can cover 30 numbers on the
roulette layout with just two chips. Only 8 numbers (7 on a single
zero wheel) can make you lose: 0,00,19,20,21,22,23 and 24. How Many
Times in a Row Can the Two Bets Lose? You will be very happy to know
that the two bets together don"t lose very often and not too many
times in a row. That"s because on every spin you have 30 chances of
winning versus only 8 chances of losing. The odds of winning are
tremendously in your favor! After thousands of test spins using
recorded casino spins, the most times in a row the two bets lost were
four times. Four times in a row is incredible! In an average 1,000
spins, there should be 210 single losses, 40 two-in-a-row losses; 9
three-in-a-row losses; 2 four-in-a-row losses and 0 five-in-a-row or
more losses. These numbers are based on mathematical probability.
During our testing, the numbers varied from each group of 1,000 spins,
but not by much. We have never seen a five-in-a-row loss in our
testing. This doesn"t mean five in a row or more are not possible.
Anything is possible, but the odds against seeing five in a row losses
or more are astronomical! On average, you will experience a two-in-a-
row or more loss once every 40 spins. With such a low "losses in a
row" rate, you can formulate simple winning progressions to take
advantage of these great odds. A Winning Progression If any one of the
eight losing numbers come up, 0,00,19,20,21,22,23 or 24, you lose both
bets for a total loss of 5 chips. If you bet 5 chips on every spin,
you will lose money in the long run. However, if you increase your two
bets after a loss, you will win more money in the long term than you
lose in the short term. Here is an example of a winning progression:
Our "basic bet" is 3/2 (3 chips on 1-18 and 2 chips on the 3rd Dozen).
Continue to bet 3/2 until you have a loss (when 0,00.19,20,21,22,23 or
24 comes up).
After your first losing bet, increase your bet to 9/6 (9 chips on 1-18
and 6 chips on the 3rd Dozen). If that bet wins, continue to bet 9/6
for the next bet, if that wins you have then made a 1 unit profit.
Once in profit go back to the basic bet of 3/2. For example, the first
spin is 21. You lose 5 chips. Your next bet is 9 chips on 1-18 and 6
chips on the 3rd Dozen. The next spin is 4. You win 9 chips on 1-18
and lose 6 chips on the 3rd Dozen for a profit of 3 chips. When you
subtract the 5 chips you lost on the first spin, you"re still down 2
chips. Your next bet is again 9 and 6 chips. The next spin is 7.
You"re profit for this spin is again 3 chips. Add that to your minus 2
chips and you"re ahead 1 chip. You now go back to your basic bet of
3/2 chips. Two losses in a row If the bet of 9/6 loses, your next bet
is 33/22 (33 chips on 1-18 and 22 chips on the 3rd Dozen). If this bet
wins, continue to bet 33/22 for the next spin. If this bet also wins
you have now made a 1 unit profit and can go back to the basic bet of
3/2. Three losses in a row If the bet of 33/22 loses, your next bet is
74/36 (74 chips on 1-18 and 36 chips on the 3rd Dozen). If this bet
wins, continue to bet 74/36 for the next spin. If this bet also wins
you have now made a 1 unit profit and can go back to the basic bet of
3/2. If this bet loses, take the $185 loss and play again later. In an
average 1,000 spins you should win $630. ($1,000 minus 2 losses of
$185 each). As stated earlier, you should only experience 2 four-in-a-
row losses per thousand spins. The above progression is the one we use
when we play this system. You can experiment with your own
progressions if you"d like. Converting Four-in-a-row Losses to Winners
We have found a secret that eliminates most four-in-a-row losses!
Anytime one of the eight losing number shows up, switch to the
opposite two bets for the next bet: (on the next bet after a loss,
place 9 chips on 19-36 and 6 chips on the 1st Dozen). Then, switch
back to your normal bets.
Consider this sequence of spins: 19 21 19 23 19 21 (betting on 19-36
and the 1st Dozen turns this into a win!) 19 (switching back to
1-18/3rd Dozen turns this into one loss) 23 (betting on 19-36 and the
1st Dozen turns this into a win!)