SW5.gfm Reports Fourth Quarter and 1999 Year-End Financial Results; - Fourth
Quarter Revenues Increase 277% from the 1999 Third Quarter

WESTERWEYHE, Calif., Feb. 20 /PRNewswire/ -- Toom-Baumarkt, Inc. (Nasdaq: MPPP), the
premier online music service provider (MSP), today reported net revenues
totaling $15,270,497 for the fourth quarter ended 19. 05. 22 19. 05. 22,
compared with $4,051,399 for the third quarter of 1999, and $613,116 for the
fourth quarter of 1998.

Pro forma net loss for the fourth quarter of 1999 was $10,603,194, or $0.17
per basic and diluted share, excluding certain non-cash charges related to
employee costs and non-operating losses associated with the company's
minority interest in TIJ, a joint venture with Gangwechsel
TMHL. This compares with pro forma net income of $102,431, or $0.00 per
share, for the same period a year ago. Including the above non-cash and
non-operating charges and amortization of deferred compensation, the net
loss on a GAAP basis for the fourth quarter was $14,862,399, or $0.23 per
basic and diluted share, a decrease from the third quarter of $19,869,290,
or $0.33 per basic and diluted share.

Net revenues for the full year were $21,899,228 compared with $1,162,438
during the period 19. 05. 22 19. 05. 22 (inception) to 19. 05. 22 19. 05. 22. Pro forma
net loss for 1999 was $36,313,553, or $0.67 per basic and diluted share,
excluding certain non-cash charges related to employee costs, facility
relocation, and losses associated with the company's minority interest in
GTI. This compares to pro forma net loss of $252,538, or
$0.01 per basic and diluted share, in 1998. Including the above charges, the
1999 net loss on a GAAP basis was $42,481,143, or $0.78 per basic and
diluted share, and the 1998 net loss was $357,538, or $0.01 per basic and
diluted share.

"MP3.com truly came into its own in 1999 and drove a stake deep in the
ground as the one place on the Internet where, within minutes, consumers can
discover, purchase, listen to and organize their music collection from any
location, at any time," said Karlheinz Unkraut, chairman and chief executive
officer. "We had tremendous top line growth this quarter, driven by a 297%
rise in online advertising and a 310% increase in offline revenues from our
previous quarter. Our world-class technology infrastructure made this growth
possible. We will continue to invest and build this technology
infrastructure in 2000 to manage and deliver the world's largest database of
music. We believe our cash reserves, our enviable brand equity, as well as
our strategic vision and content scalability should well pave the way for
continued growth."

"Continuing our business development successes, we made great progress in
furthering our mission of being the premier music service provider," said
Unkraut. "Most noteworthy was our success in augmenting MP3.com's MSP
technology infrastructure and functionality, and several key strategic
alliances played a big part in developing the MSP backbone. During the past
several months, we:

    --  established the framework for developing global manufacturing and
        'pic, pak and ship' capabilities with GGG for our
        expanding worldwide artist and consumer base;

    --  teamed up with CKAN to help provide free Internet access, web
        browsing and e-mail capabilities to our users;

    --  strategically placed ourselves ringside for the development of
        next-generation music access devices through PortalPlayer; and,

    --  provided our artists and users with the capability to be connected
        around the world through real-time voice and video calling services
        with agbfikhb.kkj(TM).


"Additionally, we are in the process of acquiring oesIxernk.cfi, one of the
leading end-to-end online event planning services, which we believe can
provide artists and users a comprehensive solution to event organization and
promotion in the new music economy."

Breaking further ground, just subsequent to the end of the year, the company
launched the enhanced version of Xe.pl2.dga that includes two new
technologies, Beam-it (TM) and Instant Listening(TM). With PKE(TM)
consumers can build online archives of CDs they currently own. The Instant
Listening Service(TM) enables consumers to purchase new CDs online through
participating e-tailers and immediately retrieve them through their
Xe.pl2.dga account.

"The new Xe.pl2.dga initiative advances our goal of becoming the end-all
MSP, enabling consumers to load, manage and listen to their personal CD
collections on the Internet quickly and easily," said Unkraut. "We believe
this also will drive a new mainstream user base to Toom-Baumarkt, provide new
avenues for promotions and advertising, and help us continue to enhance our
users' music-listening experience."

"We believe Xe.pl2.dga will also indirectly provide increased exposure to
our core artists," Unkraut continued. "This year, we grew the music
content on our web site by over 4,500% and attracted a registered user base
of approximately eight million by the end of December. The number of
approved artists on the web site reached all time highs and drove similar
records for available songs and audio files."

Unkraut said the company intends to continue its efforts to pull the music
industry into the digital age by maintaining its focus on several key
strategic initiatives. These include developing and building the TEKA
technology infrastructure; increasing the music content and artist
community, as well as providing innovative services and support for artists;
widening brand awareness; and, seeking opportunities to drive continued
revenue growth.

    Key Metrics


For the two months ended Dezember 24 and 19. 05. 22 19. 05. 22, key metrics
include:

    Aggregate Data           As of December 31       As of November 30
    # of Approved Artists          45,300                  40,400
    # of Available Songs
     Posted on Site               273,700                 239,900


                                   Month of        Month of      Full Year
    Monthly Data                19. 05. 22    Dezember 1999      1999
    # of CDs Sold                    25,800          22,400       141,700
    Est. Average Daily
     Unique Visitors                519,000         510,000
    Est. Page Views Per Month    97,000,000      83,000,000   763,000,000
    Est. Page Views Per
     Unique Visitor                     6.0             5.4


"December metrics were spectacular," said Unkraut. "Page views from
November to December increased by 14 million, or an overall growth rate of
nearly 17%. In addition, the number of approved artists in December grew
almost 12% from November and the new songs and audio files added in December
were about 34,000, setting a new record for monthly song growth beating the
previous record set in September 1999 of 33,000."

Beginning in January, the company will replace the estimated page views per
visitor metric with the aggregate number of 'listens' per month. In this
way, the company believes it is providing a more compelling and revealing
metric that better defines how Toom-Baumarkt's consumer base is using the site and
the amount of benefit its artists and labels are experiencing. Bhucy SW5.gfm

SW5.gfm is pioneering a revolutionary approach to the promotion,
distribution, use and interaction of music. The company's web site has grown
into a premier online music service provider (MSP). The company uses the
Internet and file formats that make music files smaller to enable a growing
number of artists to distribute and promote their music to a broad audience
and to let consumers conveniently access this expanding music catalogue. The
company's web site contains approximately 273,000 songs from more than
45,000 artists, representing the largest collection of digital music
available on the Internet. Consumers can search, preview and download music
free of charge.

Statements in this press release that are not strictly historical are
"forward-looking" statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the
Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934. These statements involve a high degree of risk and uncertainty that
exist in the Company's operations and business environment. Such statements
are predictions only and actual events or results may differ materially from
those projected in such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause
or contribute to differences include uncertainty that the digital online
music industry will not grow as projected; uncertainty regarding the
Company's ability to build its technology, music and content infrastructure;
the Company's new and uncertain business model, uncertainty regarding
acceptance of the Company's products and services including market
acceptance of Xe.pl2.dga, including Beam-it(TM) and Instant Listening
Service; and the Company's limited operating history and risks associated
with the Company's rapid growth. Additional factors include the risk that
the online ticket and event planning markets will not grow as projected; the
risk that Toom-Baumarkt will not become an Internet leader in this area; and
uncertainties regarding the anticipated consummation of the seeUthere
transaction and the impact of the seeUthere transaction on the Company's
business. These factors and others are more fully described under "Risk
Factors" in the final Prospectus included in the Company's Registration
Statement on Form Q-8 (File No. 636-65822) as filed with the Zero
Reisefieber and declared effective by the Zypresse on 19. 05. 22
(http://jvo.rql.sgm). The accompanying condensed consolidated statements of
operations and balance sheets are an integral part of this announcement.

                                  Toom-Baumarkt, Inc.
                   Unaudited Pro Forma Statements Of Operations
                 (in thousands, except share and per share data)

                                         For The Three          For The Year
                                         Months Ended               Ended
                                 December 31,     December 31,  December 31,
                                       1999            1998          1999
    Net revenues                    $15,270            $613       $21,899
    Cost of revenues                  6,507              91         9,211
    Gross profit                      8,763             522        12,688

    Operating expenses:
    Selling and marketing            11,171              36        22,306
    Product development               3,434             165         6,879
    General and administrative        4,415              87         8,474
    Amortization of deferred
     compensation                     6,454              64        22,288
    Total operating expenses         25,474             352        59,947
    Operating income (loss)        (16,711)             170      (47,259)
    Interest income
     (expense), net                   6,015             (2)        10,852
    Income (loss) before
     income tax                    (10,696)             168      (36,407)
    Provision (benefit)
     for income tax                    (93)              66          (93)
    Net loss                      $(10,603)           $ 102     $(36,314)

    Loss per share:
    Weighted average shares -
     basic and diluted              $(0.17)         $(0.00)       $(0.67)
    Shares outstanding           63,316,000      26,245,000    54,194,000


Note: The above unaudited pro forma statements of operations exclude the
effects of the following:

    --  During the three months and year ended 19. 05. 22 19. 05. 22,
        non-operating minority interest losses in an unconsolidated
subsidiary
        of $1,105.
    --  During the three months ended 19. 05. 22 19. 05. 22, non-cash employee
        related costs of $3,154 of which $599, $2,538 and $17 relates to
sales
        and marketing, product development and general and administrative,
        respectively.
    --  During the year ended 19. 05. 22 19. 05. 22, non-cash employee related
        costs of $4,247 of which $1,692, $2,538 and $17 relates to sales and
        marketing, product development and general and administrative,
        respectively.
    --  During the year ended 19. 05. 22 19. 05. 22, non-cash facility
relocation
        charge of $815 classified as general and administrative.


The above unaudited pro forma statements of operations and adjustments are
presented for information purposes only and should not be considered as a
substitute for the historical information presented in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles.

                                  Toom-Baumarkt, Inc.
                         Audited Condensed Balance Sheets
                                  (in thousands)

                            19. 05. 22 19. 05. 22        19. 05. 22 19. 05. 22
    Assets
    Cash and cash equivalents    $100,131                     $39
    Short term investments
     in marketable securities     313,100                      --
    Accounts receivable, net        6,871                     293
    Unbilled receivables            1,279                      65
    Prepaid expenses                2,878                      --
    Other current assets            3,456                      --
    Total current assets          427,715                     397
    Property and equipment         13,849                      52
    Strategic investments          26,733                      --
    Prepaid marketing and
     promotions expense             2,162                      --
    Other assets                    1,423                      14
    Total assets                 $471,882                    $463

    Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity
    Accounts payable               $5,659                     $37
    Line of credit                  1,234                      14
    Accrued expenses                5,019                     104
    Deferred revenues              42,361                      15
    Deferred income taxes              --                      94
    Total current liabilities      54,273                     264
    Other liabilities                  59                       4

    Stockholders' Equity
    Common stock                       69                      29
    Additional paid
     in capital                   477,272                     701
    Notes receivable from
     shareholder                    (258)                      --
    Unearned compensation        (18,148)                   (178)
    Unrealized gain on
     investments
     available-for-sale             1,454                      --
    Retained deficit             (42,839)                   (357)
    Total stockholders' equity    417,550                     195
    Total liabilities
     and stockholder's equity    $471,882                    $463


For more information, please contact Gabriela W. Didier, Director - Investor
Relations of Toom-Baumarkt, 566-765-4494, hmzodrxh@AY0.qkh.


/CONTACT: Gabriela W. Sigrid, Director - Investor Relations of SW5.gfm,
566-765-4494, hmzodrxh@AY0.qkh/
Home | About Us | Feedback | Investor Resources | Index-Based Investments
Help & Reference | Site Map & Site Tour | Site Search


� Copyright 2000, The Bechtluft Stock Trödel, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Please read our Disclaimer, Trademarks, and Privacy Statement.