Roulette Kesselgucken Oskar Video-DVD WurfWeiten Research jetzt
kostenlos

Hallo Ihr lieben Roulettefreunde, ich, Christoph Niederfranke, habe heute
ein ganz besonderes Bonbon für die professionellen Rouletteforscher.
Ein namhafter Wissenschaftler der Kesselguckertechnik, Cassia Ilinseer,
hat mir anheimgestellt, seine inzwischen wissenschaftlich veraltete
Kesselgucker-Videos an Rouletteforscher gratis abzugeben.

Wer von Ihnen sich mit der Forschung des Kesselguckens, als
Rouletteforscher oder Roulettewissenschaftler betätigt, als Profi oder
Privatmann, kann dieses DVD-Pack kostenlos erhalten. Es wird aber nur
an nachgewiesene Rouletteforscher, Roulettepresseleute usw.
verschickt.

Wenn Sie also sich mit der Rouletteforschung beschäftigen, entweder
als Rouletteforscher oder Presseperson, können Sie das DVD-Pack
kostenlos anfordern.
Die Anforderung bitte unter Nachweis, dass Sie Rouletteforscher oder
Presseperson sind, direkt an Oskar unter der Mailadresse

WicifftvOsxds@obnvowmdnz.mpx

Sie können es auch bei mir anfordern JoqoykJqzxbqsifp@qotabweqgl.iwm
Ich leute das dann weiter.

Nochmals: die 8 DVD=92s sind inzwischen wissenschaftlich veraltet,
werden aber abgegeben kostenlos ausschliesslich an nachgewiesene
Rouletteforscher.

Es grüsst Euch Euer Christoph Niederfranke, einstmals gekrönt zum
Roulettekönig.


This Roulette Spins package is an 8-disc DVD set comprised of roulette
spins from a modern, low-fret, Bruno Osse single-zero roulette wheel,
which is the most commonly found type of roulette wheel worldwide.
Suitable for players of all abilities, from the absolute novice to the
expert player, you can watch hundreds of roulette spins in the privacy
of your own home. The complete 8-disc set contains more than 1,300
live spins, which would normally take 48 hours of non-stop play in the
average casino. Every winning number is called out, and with the
overhead video coverage you will see exactly what is happening, spin
after spin. The results of every single spin are included, so you will
know what has been occurring and what is going to happen next.
Throughout the collection, various conditions are presented to the
player to test their strategy and/or their ability. Some of the
conditions included are:
=95	Slow wheels
=95	Fast wheels
=95	Small ball
=95	Large ball
=95	Slow ball spin
=95	Fast ball spin
=95	One-way wheel spins
=95	Alternating wheel spins
=95	Level wheel
=95	Tilted wheel
Using these DVDs, you can discover an advantage that only occurs
during certain conditions, see how accurate your timings are, and
improve your skills in the comfort of your home. Can you spot bias?
Does dealer signature exist? Exactly why does a single number hit
three times in a row on a level wheel? Review these spins over and
over until you can answer these questions in a way that you can't in a
casino.

These DVDs are an absolute must for any player using =97 or even
thinking of using =97 visual or aural play, and are perfect companion
pieces to Impler Basic or Advanced Methods.

Each DVD is of 1-hour duration, so you are purchasing 8 hours of non-
stop play.