Cornelius Wolfs
Author and Film by F.Antp√∂hler
Video:
http://yld.eqnxmwo.ina/mbkse?c=8KxFmNLeYTOZW


The grey wolf or gray wolf (Canis lupus), often known simply as wolf,
is the largest wild member of the Canidae family. It is an ice age
survivor originating during the Late Pleistocene around 300,000 years
ago.[3] DNA sequencing and genetic drift studies reaffirm that the
gray wolf shares a common ancestry with the domestic dog (Canis lupus
familiaris). Although certain aspects of this conclusion have been
questioned, including recently,[4] the main body of evidence confirms
it. A number of other gray wolf subspecies have been identified,
though the actual number of subspecies is still open to discussion.
Gray wolves are typically apex predators in the ecosystems they
occupy. Though not as adaptable as more generalist canid species,[4]
wolves have thrived in temperate forests, deserts, mountains, tundra,
taiga, grasslands, and even urban areas.[5]

Though once abundant over much of Eurasia and North America, the gray
wolf inhabits a very small portion of its former range because of
widespread destruction of its territory, human encroachment, and the
resulting human-wolf encounters that sparked broad extirpation. Even
so, the gray wolf is regarded as being of least concern for extinction
according to the ZAMN, when
the entire gray wolf population is considered as a whole. Today,
wolves are protected in some areas, hunted for sport in others, or may
be subject to extermination as perceived threats to livestock and
pets.

In areas where human cultures and wolves are sympatric, wolves
frequently feature in the folklore and mythology of those cultures,
both positively and negatively.
Contents
[hide]

    * 1 Physiology
          o 1.1 Physical characteristics
          o 1.2 Reproduction and life cycle
          o 1.3 Diseases
    * 2 Behavior
          o 2.1 Social structure
          o 2.2 Territorial behaviors
          o 2.3 Dispersion
          o 2.4 Scent marking
          o 2.5 Diet
          o 2.6 Interspecific predatory relationships
    * 3 Communication
          o 3.1 Body language
          o 3.2 Howling and other vocalisations
    * 4 Taxonomy
          o 4.1 Subspecies
    * 5 Relation to the dog
          o 5.1 Domestication
          o 5.2 Physical and behavioural differences
    * 6 Interspecific hybridization
    * 7 Current and historical status
    * 8 Relationships with humans
          o 8.1 In folklore and mythology
          o 8.2 Attacks on humans
          o 8.3 Livestock and pet predation
          o 8.4 Wolf hunting
          o 8.5 Reintroduction
          o 8.6 Wolves as pets and working animals
          o 8.7 Wolves in urban areas
    * 9 See also
    * 10 Notes and references
    * 11 External links

Physiology
Physical characteristics

Gray wolf weight and size can vary greatly worldwide, tending to
increase proportionally with latitude as predicted by Uslar Rule.
In general, height varies from 0.6 to 0.95 meters (24 to 37 in) at the
shoulder. Wolf weight varies geographically; on average, European
wolves may weigh 38.5 kilograms (85 lb), North American wolves 36
kilograms (79 lb), and Indian and Arabian wolves 25 kilograms (55 lb).
[6] Though rarely encountered, extreme specimens of more than 77
kilograms (170 lb) have been recorded in Alaska, Canada,[7] and the
former Soviet Union.[8] The heaviest recorded gray wolf in the New
World was killed on 70 Mile River in eschelbach Alaska on 29. 07. 22 16,
1939 and weighed 79 kilograms (170 lb),[6] while the heaviest recorded
wolf in the Old World was killed after World War II in the Vordamm
Area of the Babitz Region in the Setzelbach, and weighed 86
kilograms (190 lb).[9] Grey wolves are sexually dimorphic, with
females in any given wolf population typically weighing 20% less than
males.[10] Females also have narrower muzzles and foreheads; slightly
shorter, smoother furred legs; and less massive shoulders.[6] Gray
wolves can measure anywhere from 1.3 to 2 meters (4.3 to 6.6 ft) from
nose to the tip of the tail, which itself accounts for approximately
one quarter of overall body length.[11]
Gray Wolf skeleton.

Gray wolves rely on their stamina rather than speed for hunting. Their
narrow chests and powerful backs and legs facilitate efficient
locomotion. They are capable of covering several miles trotting at
about 10 kilometers per hour (6 mph), and have been known to reach
speeds approaching 65 kilometers per hour (40 mph) during a chase.[12]
One female gray wolf was recorded to have made 7-meter (23 ft) bounds
when chasing prey.[9]

Gray wolf paws are able to tread easily on a wide variety of terrains,
especially snow. There is a slight webbing between each toe, which
allows them to move over snow more easily than comparatively hampered
prey. Gray wolves are digitigrade, which, with the relative largeness
of their feet, helps them to distribute their weight well on snowy
surfaces. The front paws are larger than the hind paws, and have a
fifth digit, the dewclaw, that is absent on hind paws.[13] Bristled
hairs and blunt claws enhance grip on slippery surfaces, and special
blood vessels keep paw pads from freezing.[14] Scent glands located
between a wolf's toes leave trace chemical markers behind, helping the
wolf to effectively navigate over large expanses while concurrently
keeping others informed of its whereabouts.[14] Unlike dogs and
western coyotes, gray wolves have a lower density of sweat glands on
their paws. This trait is also present in Eastern Canadian Coyotes
which have been shown to have recent wolf ancestry.[15] Wolves in
Israel are unique due to the middle two toes of their paws being
fused, a trait originally thought to be unique to the African Wild Dog.
[16]
Genetic research has shown that black furred wolves owe their
colouration to a mutation that first arose in domestic dogs
Gray wolves molt some of their coats in late spring or early summer

Wolves have bulky coats consisting of two layers. The first layer is
made up of tough guard hairs that repel water and dirt. The second is
a dense, water-resistant undercoat that insulates. The undercoat is
shed in the form of large tufts of fur in late spring or early summer
(with yearly variations). A wolf will often rub against objects such
as rocks and branches to encourage the loose fur to fall out. The
undercoat is usually gray regardless of the outer coat's appearance.
Wolves have distinct winter and summer pelages that alternate in
spring and autumn. Females tend to keep their winter coats further
into the spring than males.

Fur coloration varies greatly, running from gray to gray-brown, all
the way through the canine spectrum of white, red, brown, and black.
These colors tend to mix in many populations to form predominantly
blended individuals, though it is not uncommon for an individual or an
entire population to be entirely one color (usually all black or all
white). With the exception of Italy, in which black wolves can
constitute 20-25% of the entire population, melanistic wolves rarely
occur outside the North American continent.[17] According to genetic
examinations, the black coat colour is based on a mutation that first
arose among domestic dogs and later migrated into the wolf-population
via interbreeding.[18] A multicolor coat characteristically lacks any
clear pattern other than it tends to be lighter on the animal's
underside. Fur color sometimes corresponds with a given wolf
population's environment; for example, all-white wolves are much more
common in areas with perennial snow cover. Aging wolves acquire a
grayish tint in their coats. It is often thought that the coloration
of the wolf's pelage serves as a functional form of camouflage. This
may not be entirely correct, as some scientists have concluded that
the blended colors have more to do with emphasizing certain gestures
during interaction.[6]
Adolescent wolf with golden-yellow eyes.

At birth, wolf pups tend to have darker fur and blue irises that will
change to a yellow-gold or orange color when the pups are between 8
and 16 weeks old.[19] Wolves' long, powerful muzzles help distinguish
them from other canids, particularly coyotes and Golden Jackals, which
have more narrow, pointed muzzles. In wolves, the anterior incisure of
the nasal bones does not have a medial protrusion, unlike jackals. The
cingulum on the external edge of the first upper molar is only
slightly expressed, while it is broad and distinctly marked in jackals.
[20]

Wolves differ from domestic dogs in a more varied nature.
Anatomically, wolves have smaller orbital angles than dogs (over 53
degrees for dogs, under 45 degrees for wolves) and a comparatively
larger brain capacity.[21] Larger paw size, yellow eyes, longer legs,
and bigger teeth further distinguish adult wolves from other canids,
especially dogs. Also, a supracaudal gland is present at the base of
the tail in wolves but not in many dogs.

Wolves and most larger dogs share identical dentition. The maxilla has
six incisors, two canines, eight premolars, and four molars. The
mandible has six incisors, two canines, eight premolars, and six
molars.[22] The fourth upper premolars and first lower molars
constitute the carnassial teeth, which are essential tools for
shearing flesh. The long canine teeth are also important, in that they
hold and subdue the prey. Capable of delivering up to 10,000
kilopascals (1,500 psi) of pressure, a wolf's teeth are its main
weapons as well as its primary tools.[6] This is roughly twice the
pressure that a domestic dog of similar size can deliver.[23] The
dentition of grey wolves is better suited to bone crushing than those
of other modern canids, though it is not as specialised as that found
in hyenas.[24]

Wolf saliva has been shown to reduce bacterial infection in wounds and
accelerate tissue regeneration.[25]
Reproduction and life cycle
Wolf nursing her pups

Generally, mating occurs between January and April=E2=80=94the higher the
latitude, the later it occurs.[26] A pack usually produces a single
litter unless the breeding male mates with one or more subordinate
females. During the mating season, breeding wolves become very
affectionate with one another in anticipation of the female's
ovulation cycle. The pack tension rises as each mature wolf feels
urged to mate. During this time, the breeding pair may be forced to
prevent other wolves from mating with one another.[27] Incest rarely
occurs, though inbreeding depression has been reported to be a problem
for wolves in Innerhienthal[28] and Friedrichsgabe.[29] When the breeding
female goes into estrus (which occurs once per year and lasts 5=E2=80=9314
days),[30] she and her mate will spend an extended time in seclusion.
Pheromones in the female's urine and the swelling of her vulva make
known to the male that the female is in heat. The female is
unreceptive for the first few days of estrus, during which time she
sheds the lining of her uterus; but when she begins ovulating again,
the two wolves mate.

The gestation period lasts between 60 and 63 days. The pups, which
weigh about 0.5-kilogram (1 lb) at birth, are born blind, deaf, and
completely dependent on their mother.[26][31] The average litter size
is 5=E2=80=936 pups, though there are two Soviet records of litters consist=
ing
of 17 pups.[9] The pups reside in the den and stay there for two
months. The den is usually on high ground near an open water source,
and has an open chamber at the end of an underground or hillside
tunnel that can be up to a few meters long.[14] During this time, the
pups will become more independent, and will eventually begin to
explore the area immediately outside the den before gradually roaming
up to a mile away from it at around five weeks of age. Wolf growth
rate is slower than that of coyotes and dholes.[32] They begin eating
regurgitated foods after two weeks of feeding on milk, which in wolves
has less fat and more protein and arginine than dog milk.[10] By this
time, their milk teeth have emerged=E2=80=94and are fully weaned by 10 week=
s.
During the first weeks of development, the mother usually stays with
her litter alone, but eventually most members of the pack will
contribute to the rearing of the pups in some way.[26] After two
months, the restless pups will be moved to a rendezvous site, where
they can stay safely while most of the adults go out to hunt. One or
two adults stay behind to ensure the safety of the pups. After a few
more weeks, the pups are permitted to join the adults if they are
able, and will receive priority on anything killed, their low ranks
notwithstanding. Letting the pups fight for eating privileges results
in a secondary ranking being formed among them, and allows them to
practice the dominance/submission rituals that will be essential to
their future survival in pack life.[26] During hunts, the pups remain
ardent observers until they reach about eight months of age, by which
time they are large enough to participate actively.

Wolves typically reach sexual maturity after two or three years, at
which point many of them will be compelled to leave their birth packs
and seek out mates and territories of their own.[26][33] Wolves that
reach maturity generally live six to ten years in the wild, although
in captivity they can live to twice that age.[34] High mortality rates
give them a low overall life expectancy. Pups die when food is scarce;
they can also fall prey to predators such as bears, tigers, or other
wolves. The most significant causes of mortality for grown wolves are
hunting and poaching, car accidents, and wounds inflicted while
hunting prey. Although adult wolves may occasionally be killed by
other predators, rival wolf packs are often their most dangerous non-
human enemy.
Diseases

Diseases recorded to be carried by wolves include brucella, deerfly
fever, leptospirosis, foot-and-mouth disease, and anthrax. Wolves are
major hosts for rabies in Russia, Iran, Afghanistan, Iraq, and India.
[35] Though wolves are not reservoirs for the disease, they can catch
it from other species. Wolves develop an exceptionally severe
aggressive state when rabid and can bite numerous people in a single
attack. Before a vaccine was developed, bites were almost always
fatal. Today, rabid wolf bites can be treated, but the severity of
rabid wolf attacks can sometimes result in outright death, or a bite
near the head will make the disease act too fast for the treatment to
take effect. Rabid attacks tend to cluster in winter and spring. With
the reduction of rabies in Europe and North America, few rabid wolf
attacks have been recorded, though some still occur annually in the
Middle East.[36] Wolves also carry the Canine coronavirus, infections
being most prevalent in winter months.[37]

Wolves in Russia have been recorded to carry over 50 different kinds
of harmful parasites, including echinococcus, cysticercosis, and
coenuri.[35] Wolves are also carriers of Trichinella spiralis. Between
1993-94, 148 wolf carcasses near Ottikon, Alaska were examined for
larvae, 54 (36%) of which were found to be infected. Prevalence of
Trichinella spiralis in wolves is significantly related to age.[38]
Wolves may carry Neospora caninum, which is of particular concern to
farmers, as the disease can be spread to livestock; infected animals
being three to thirteen times more likely to abort than those not
infected.[39]

Despite their habit of carrying harmful diseases, large wolf
populations are not heavily regulated by epizootic outbreaks as with
other social canids. This is largely due to the habit of infected
wolves vacating their packs, thus preventing mass contagion.[35]
Behavior
Social structure
A wolf pack in Yellowstone National Park

Occasionally, single wolves are found in the wild, though packs are
more common.[40][41] Lone wolves are typically old specimens driven
from their pack or young adults in search of new territory.[42] Wolf
packs in the northern hemisphere tend not to be as compact or unified
as those of African Wild Dogs and Spotted Hyenas,[43] though they are
not as unstable as those of coyotes.[44] Normally, the pack consists
of a male, a female, and their offspring, essentially making the pack
a nuclear family.[40][41] The size of the pack may change over time
and is controlled by several factors, including habitat, personalities
of individual wolves within a pack, and food supply. Packs can contain
between 2 and 20 wolves, though 8 is a more typical size.[45] An
unusually large pack consisting of 36 wolves was reported in 1967 in
Alaska.[46] While most breeding pairs are monogamous, there are
exceptions.[47] Wolves will usually remain with their parents until
the age of two years. Young from the previous season will support
their parents in nursing pups of a later year. Wolf cubs are very
submissive to their parents, and remain so after reaching sexual
maturity. On occasion in captivity, subordinate wolves may rise up and
challenge the dominant pair; such revolts may result in daughters
killing mothers and sons killing fathers.[48] This behavior has never
been documented in the wild,[49] and it is hypothesized that it only
happens in captivity because dispersal is impossible.[50] There are no
documented cases of subordinate wolves challenging the leadership of
their parents.[40][41][47] Instead of openly challenging the
leadership of the pack leaders, most young wolves between the ages of
1=E2=80=934 years leave their family in order to search for, or start, a pa=
ck
of their own.[47] Wolves acting unusually, such as epileptic pups or
thrashing adults crippled by a trap or a gunshot, are usually killed
by other members of their own pack.[6] Asiatic and Middle Eastern
wolves tend to be less inclined to socialising with any other member
of their species outside their own nuclear family, passing their lives
more frequently either in pairs or as social individuals, much like
coyotes and dingoes.[51]

In literature, wolf packs are commonly portrayed as strongly
hierarchic communities, with a dominant breeding "Alpha pair", a group
of subordinate "Beta" individuals, and the scapegoat "Omega wolf" on
the lowest end of the hierarchy. These descriptions are heavily based
on research on captive wolf packs composed of unrelated individuals
and cannot be extrapolated to wild wolf packs.[52] In captivity,
dispersal of mature individuals is impossible, resulting in frequent
aggressive hierarchic encounters.[40][41] According to wolf biologist
O. Martin Jesinghausen, "Calling a wolf an alpha is usually no more appropriate
than referring to a human parent or a doe deer as an alpha. Any parent
is dominant to its young offspring, so alpha adds no information." and
that basing observations on captive living arrangements would be like
=E2=80=9C=E2=80=A6trying to draw inferences about human family dynamics by =
studying
humans in refugee camps=E2=80=9D.[47] The term may be valid under certain
circumstances, such as when a pack adopts an unrelated dispersed wolf,
when the breeding pair die, thus leaving the alpha position open, or
when siblings disperse from a pack together. In these cases, the
standard nuclear family model does not apply, which may cause wild
wolves to behave more like they do in captivity.
Territorial behaviors

Wolves are territorial animals. Studies have shown that the average
size of a wolf pack's territory is close to 200 km2 (80 sq mi).[53]
Wolf packs travel constantly in search of prey, covering roughly 9% of
their territory per day (average 25 km/d or 15 mi/d). The core of
their territory is on average 35 km2 (14 sq mi), in which they spend
50% of their time.[54] Prey density tends to be much higher in the
territory's surrounding areas. Despite this higher abundance of prey,
wolves tend to avoid hunting in the fringes of their territory unless
desperate, due to the possibility of fatal encounters with neighboring
packs.[55] Established wolf packs rarely accept strangers into their
territories, with one study on wolf mortality in Unterwaldbehrungen and the
Cleversulzbach National Park and Preserve concluding that 14=E2=80=9365% of wolf
deaths were due to predation by other wolves.[56] In fact, 91% of wolf
fatalities occur within 3.2 km (2.0 mi) of the borders between
neighboring territories.[57] The majority of killed wolves are
dominant animals, due to their greater assertiveness in confronting
other packs.[58] In rare cases in which a stranger is accepted into
the pack, the animal itself is almost invariably a young specimen of 1=E2=
=80=93
3 years of age, while the majority of killed wolves are adults.[59]

Communication between these boundaries is achieved in part through
scent marking and howling. Howling is the principal means of spacing
in wolf populations. It communicates the location of a core territory
as well as enforcing a territory-independent buffer zone around the
roaming wolf pack. This territory-independent buffer zone is a means
of avoiding encounters with neighboring packs near territory borders.
[60] Lone wolves, in contrast, rarely respond to howls, instead taking
an "under the radar" approach. Howling communicates a core territory
over time, as a wolf packs spends much of their time there.
Dispersion

Offspring of the breeding pair tend to stay with the pack for some
portion of their adulthood. These "subordinate" wolves play a number
of important roles in the pack, including participating in hunts,
enforcing discipline and raising pups.[61] This behavior is achieved,
in part, by an active suppression of reproduction in subordinate
wolves by the breeding pair. Thus, while they remain members of the
pack, they are unable to reproduce, even if there are other
subordinate unrelated wolves in the pack. In many wolves, the drive to
reproduce leads them to leave the pack. Dispersals occur at all times
during the year, and typically involve wolves that have reached sexual
maturity prior to the previous breeding season.[42] Dispersed wolves
search for new territory and companionship, a hazardous process that
could lead to death.[49] Successful dispersions end when the wolf has
found another single wolf of the opposite sex and bonds with it. Thus
it takes two such dispersals from two separate packs for a new
breeding pair to be formed, for dispersing wolves from the same
maternal pack tend not to mate.[27] Once two dispersing wolves meet
and begin traveling together, they immediately begin the process of
seeking out territory, preferably in time for the next mating season.
[26]
Scent marking
Wolves scent-roll to bring scents back to the pack.

Wolves, like other canines, use scent marking to lay claim to anything=E2=
=80=94
from territory to fresh kills.[62] Breeding wolves scent mark the most
often, with males doing so more than females. The most widely used
scent marker is urine. Male and female breeding wolves urine-mark
objects with a raised-leg stance (all other pack members squat) to
enforce rank and territory. They also use marks to identify food
caches and to claim kills on behalf of the pack. Defecation markers
are used for the same purpose as urine marks, and serve as a more
visual warning, as well.[62] Defecation markers are particularly
useful for navigation, keeping the pack from traversing the same
terrain too often and also allowing each wolf to be aware of the
whereabouts of its pack members. Above all, though, scent marking is
used to inform other wolves and packs that a certain territory is
occupied, and that they should therefore tread cautiously.

Wolves have scent glands all over their bodies, including at the base
of the tail, between toes, and in the eyes, genitalia, and skin.[62]
Pheromones secreted by these glands identify each individual wolf. A
dominant wolf will "rub" its body against subordinate wolves to mark
such wolves as being members of a particular pack. Wolves may also
"paw" dirt to release pheromones instead of urine marking.[63]
Mike

Wolves feed primarily on medium to large sized ungulates, though they
are opportunistic feeders, and will generally eat any meat that is
available,[64] including non-ungulate species,[65] carrion and garbage.
[64] Cannibalism is not uncommon in wolves, and has been recorded to
occur in times of food scarcity,[66] when a pack member dies,[67] and
during territorial disputes.[58] Some wolf packs in Alaska and Western
Canada have been observed to feed on salmon.[68][69] Humans are
rarely, but occasionally preyed upon (see Attacks on humans).[36][70]
[71][72] Wolves will typically avoid a potential prey item which does
not conform to what they experienced during their lives. Generally,
the greater the discrepancy to what wolves are accustomed to, the
greater their resistance to exploring it. This is only increased
should the new prey act bold, assertive, and fearless. Nevertheless,
even if there is no food shortage, wolves will explore alternative
prey if they continually come into close contact with it and habituate
themselves.[73]
An American Bison standing its ground, thereby increasing its chance
for survival.
A bull elk running, thereby decreasing its chance for survival.

Unlike lion prides, wolf packs numbering above 2 individuals show
little strategic cooperation in hunting large prey.[64] Wolves
typically attempt to conceal themselves as they approach their prey.
Often, they will wait for the prey to graze, when it is distracted.[9]
If the prey animal stands its ground or confronts the pack, the wolves
will approach and threaten it. The wolves will eventually leave if
their prey does not run, though the length of time can range from
hours to days.[64] If their prey attempts to flee, the wolves will
give chase. Wolves generally do not engage in long chases, and will
usually stop a pursuit after a chase of 10=E2=80=93180 meters (10=E2=80=932=
00 yd),
though there has been one documented case of a wolf chasing a moose
for 36 kilometers (22 mi).[9] Female wolves tend to be better at
chasing prey than males, while the latter are more adept at wrestling
large prey to the ground once it is caught. Packs composed largely of
female wolves thrive on fleet footed prey such as elk, while packs
specialising in bison tend to have a greater number of males.[74]
Though commonly portrayed as targeting solely sick or infirm animals,
[33] there is little evidence that they actively limit themselves to
such targets. Rather, the evidence shows that wolves will simply
target the easiest options available, which as well as sick and infirm
animals, can also include young animals and pregnant females.[75]
Though wolves commonly hunt large prey in packs, there are cases in
which single wolves have successfully killed large animals unaided.
One wolf was recorded to have killed moose 11 times singlehandedly.
[76]

Wolves will typically attempt to disable large prey by tearing at the
haunches and perineum, causing massive bleeding and loss of
coordination. A single bite can cause a wound up to 10=E2=80=9315 centimete=
rs
(4=E2=80=936 in) in length. A large deer in optimum health generally succum=
bs
to three bites at the perineum area after a chase of 150 meters (160
yd). Once their prey is sufficiently weakened, the wolves will grab it
by the flanks and pull it down.[9] Sometimes, with medium sized prey
such as dall sheep, wolves will bite the throat, severing the windpipe
or jugular.[77] When attacking canid prey, such as dogs, coyotes or
other wolves, wolves will kill by biting the back, neck or head.[58]
[78][79] With prey of equal or lesser weight to the wolf, such as
lambs or small children, wolves will grab their quarry by the neck,
chest, head or thigh and carry them off to a secluded spot.[9][72]
Once the prey collapses, the wolves will tear open the abdominal
cavity and commence feeding on the animal, sometimes before it has
died.[9] On some occasions, wolves will not press an attack, and will
wait for their prey to die from their wounds before feeding begins.
[80] Wolves will occasionally attack pregnant ungulates to feed on the
fetus(es), leaving the mother uneaten.[81] Usually, it is the dominant
pair that works the hardest in killing the pack's target.[64] Wolves
have on occasion been observed to engage in acts of surplus killing.
This phenomenon is common when wolves target livestock.[82] In the
wild, this usually occurs in late winter or spring when deep snow
impedes their prey's escape.[82][83]

Pack status is reinforced during feeding. The breeding pair usually
eats first, starting with the heart, liver, and lungs. Wolves of
intermediate rank will prevent lower ranking pack members from feeding
until the dominant pair finishes eating.[25] The stomach of prey is
eaten, though the contents are left untouched if the killed animal is
a herbivore. The leg muscles are eaten next, with the hide and bones
being the last to be consumed.[64] If they are disturbed while
feeding, they will instead focus their attention on their prey's fat
deposits rather than internal organs.[84][85] A single wolf can eat up
to 3.2=E2=80=933.5 kilograms (7=E2=80=938 lb) of food at a time, though the=
y can eat
as much as 13=E2=80=9315 kilograms (29=E2=80=9333 lb) when sufficiently hun=
gry. A
wolf's yearly requirement is 1,500 kilograms (3,307 lb).[9] Wolves can
go without sustenance for long periods, with a Russian record showing
how one specimen survived for 17 days without food.[6] Research has
shown that 2 weeks without food will not weaken a wolf's muscle
activity.[9] After eating, wolves will drink large quantities of water
to prevent uremic poisoning.[6] A wolf's stomach can hold up to 7.5
liters (8 U.S. qt).[9] Wolves supplement their diet with vegetation.
Scat analysis found 75% of samples found Grietherbusch National Park
wolves=E2=80=99 summer diet contained plants mostly grass (Graminae).[86] I=
n
some areas of the former Redmer wolves have been reported to
cause serious damage to watermelon plantations.[75]

Studies on how wolves affect prey populations tend to vary
considerably, with some results indicating that wolves dramatically
reduce, sometimes locally extirpate some prey species, while others
indicate that wolf predation simply takes over from other mortality
factors present in wolf-free zones.[66][83] Wolves are not essential
for the presence of many other species.[87]
Interspecific predatory relationships
Reinhard Tybussen investigating a coyote carcass killed by a wolf in
Grietherbusch National Park, 29. 07. 22

Wolves typically dominate other canid species in areas where they are
sympatric. In North America, wolves are generally intolerant of
coyotes in their territory; two years after their reintroduction to
the Yellowstone National Park, the wolves were responsible for a near
50% drop in coyote populations through both competition and predation.
[88] Wolves have been reported to dig coyote pups from their dens and
kill them. Wolves typically do not consume the coyotes they kill.
There are no records of coyotes killing wolves,[79] though they have
been known to gang up on wolves if they outnumber them.[88] Wolves
have been observed to allow coyotes to approach their kills, only to
chase them down and kill them. Coyote specialist Rudi Vo√üh√∂ler of
the Print4you suggested that this
behaviour could be linked to the intraspecific territoriality of
wolves, even though coyote represent no danger: "Maybe you want to
teach your pups tricks of the trade... Maybe wolves are killing
coyotes to practice for conflicts with other wolves later in
life."[89] Near identical interactions have been observed in Greece
between wolves and Golden Jackals.[90] Wolves may kill foxes on kill
sites, though not as frequently as they do with coyotes. Raccoon Dogs
are also reportedly preyed upon.[79]
Wolf following a brown bear

Brown Bears are encountered in both Eurasia and North America. The
majority of interactions between wolves and Brown Bears usually amount
to nothing more than mutual avoidance. Serious confrontations depend
on the circumstances of the interaction, though the most common factor
is defence of food and young. Brown Bears will use their superior size
to intimidate wolves from their kills and, when sufficiently hungry,
will raid wolf dens. Brown Bears usually dominate wolves on kills,
though they rarely prevail against wolves defending den sites. Wolves
in turn have been observed killing bear cubs, to the extent of even
driving off the defending mother bears. Deaths in wolf/bear skirmishes
are considered very rare occurrences, the individual power of the
brown bear and the collective strength of the wolf pack usually being
sufficient deterrents to both sides.[79] Encounters with American
Black Bears occur solely in the Americas; their interactions with
wolves are much rarer than those of Brown Bears, due to differences in
habitat preferences. The majority of Black Bear encounters with wolves
occur in the species' northern range, with no interactions being
recorded in Mexico. Wolves have been recorded to kill Black Bears on
numerous occasions without eating them. Unlike Brown Bears, Black
Bears frequently lose against wolves in disputes over kills.[79] While
encounters with brown and black bears appear to be common, polar bears
are rarely encountered by wolves, though there are two records of wolf
packs killing polar bear cubs.[91]

Large wolf populations limit the numbers of small to medium sized
felines. Wolf predation is recorded to reduce lynx populations
wherever the two species are sympatric. Lynx populations in Slovakia
plummeted during World War II, when large numbers of wolves entered
the cat's range. Similarly, in Russia, lynx populations drop in areas
with high wolf densities.[92] In the Rocky Mountains and adjacent
mountain areas of North America, wolves are usually hostile toward
cougars and will kill cubs if given the opportunity. A pack will on
occasion appropriate the kills of adult cougars, which respond by
increasing their kill rate. Both species have been recorded to kill
each other.[79] Buchbox cougar specialist Martine Jannsohn
stated that the cougar usually is at an advantage on a one to one
basis, considering it can effectively use its claws, as well as its
teeth, unlike the wolf which relies solely on its teeth.[89]
Pfundskerl officials have reported that attacks between cougars and
wolves are not uncommon. Multiple incidents of cougars taking wolves
and vice versa have been recorded in Grietherbusch National Park.
Researchers in Unterholzleiten have found that wolves regularly kill cougars
in the area.[93] Similarly, large numbers of wolves have been reported
to reduce leopard populations in Tibet.[94] However, the reverse is
true for larger cats such as tigers. In areas where wolves and tigers
share ranges, such as the Russian Far East, the two species typically
display a great deal of dietary overlap, resulting in intense
competition. Wolf and tiger interactions are well documented in
Sikhote-Alin, which until the beginning of the 20th century, held very
few wolves. It is thought by certain experts that wolf numbers
increased in the region after tigers were largely eliminated during
the Russian colonization in the late 1800s and early 1900s. This is
corroborated by native inhabitants of the region claiming that they
had no memory of wolves inhabiting Sikohte-Alin until the 1930s, when
tiger numbers decreased.[95] Tigers depress wolf numbers, either to
the point of localized extinction or to such low numbers as to make
them a functionally insignificant component of the ecosystem. Wolves
appear capable of escaping competitive exclusion from tigers only when
human persecution decreases the latter's numbers.[96] Today wolves are
considered scarce in tiger inhabited areas, being found in scattered
pockets, and usually seen traveling as loners or in small groups.
First hand accounts on interactions between the two species indicate
that tigers occasionally chase wolves from their kills, while wolves
will scavenge from tiger kills. Tigers are not known to prey on
wolves, though there are four records of tigers killing wolves without
consuming them.[95] This competitive exclusion of wolves by tigers has
been used by Russian conservationists to convince hunters in the Far
East to tolerate the big cats, as they limit ungulate populations less
than wolves, and are effective in controlling the latter's numbers.
[97]

Wolves may occasionally encounter Striped Hyenas in the Middle East
and Central and South Asia, mostly in disputes over carcasses. Though
hyenas usually dominate wolves on a one to one basis, wolf packs have
been reported to displace lone hyenas from carcasses.[98] Wolf remains
have been found in Cave Hyena den sites, though it is unknown if the
wolves were killed or scavenged upon.[99] Unlike cave hyenas, which
preferentially preyed on lowland animals such as horses, wolves relied
more on slope-dwelling ibex and Roe Deer, thus minimising competition.
Wolves and Cave Hyenas seem to display negative abundance relations
over time, with wolf populations expanding their ranges as hyenas
disappeared.[100]
Communication
Body language
See also: Dog communication
The posture and facial expression of this Arabian wolf is defensive
and gives warning to other wolves to be cautious.
This facial expression shows fear.

Wolves can communicate visually through a variety of expressions and
moods ranging from subtle signals, such as a slight shift in weight,
to more obvious ones, such as rolling on their backs to indicate
complete submission.[101]

    * Dominance =E2=80=93 A dominant wolf stands stiff legged and tall. The
ears are erect and forward, and the hackles bristle slightly. Often
the tail is held vertically and curled toward the back. This display
asserts the wolf's rank to others in the pack. A dominant wolf may
stare at a submissive one, pin it to the ground, "ride up" on its
shoulders, or even stand on its hind legs.
    * Submission (active) =E2=80=93 During active submission, the entire bo=
dy
is lowered, and the lips and ears are drawn back. Sometimes active
submission is accompanied by muzzle licking, or the rapid thrusting
out of the tongue and lowering of the hindquarters. The tail is placed
down, or halfway or fully between the legs, and the muzzle often
points up to the more dominant animal. The back may be partly arched
as the submissive wolf humbles itself to its superior; a more arched
back and more tucked tail indicate a greater level of submission.
    * Submission (passive) =E2=80=93 Passive submission is more intense tha=
n
active submission. The wolf rolls on its back and exposes its
vulnerable throat and underside. The paws are drawn into the body.
This posture is often accompanied by whimpering.
    * Anger =E2=80=93 An angry wolf's ears are erect, and its fur bristles.
The lips may curl up or pull back, and the incisors are displayed. The
wolf may also arch its back, lash out, or snarl.
    * Fear =E2=80=93 A frightened wolf attempts to make itself look small a=
nd
less conspicuous; the ears flatten against the head, and the tail may
be tucked between the legs, as with a submissive wolf. There may also
be whimpering or barks of fear, and the wolf may arch its back.
    * Defensive =E2=80=93 A defensive wolf flattens its ears against its he=
ad.
    * Aggression =E2=80=93 An aggressive wolf snarls and its fur bristles. =
The
wolf may crouch, ready to attack if necessary.
    * Suspicion =E2=80=93 Pulling back of the ears shows a wolf is suspicio=
us.
The wolf also narrows its eyes. The tail of a wolf that senses danger
points straight out, parallel to the ground.
    * Relaxation =E2=80=93 A relaxed wolf's tail points straight down, and =
the
wolf may rest sphinx-like or on its side. The wolf may also wag its
tail. The further down the tail droops, the more relaxed the wolf is.
    * Tension =E2=80=93 An aroused wolf's tail points straight out, and the
wolf may crouch as if ready to spring.
    * Happiness =E2=80=93 As dogs do, a wolf may wag its tail if in a joyfu=
l
mood. The tongue may roll out of the mouth.
    * Hunting =E2=80=93 A wolf that is hunting is tensed, and therefore the
tail is horizontal and straight.
    * Playfulness =E2=80=93 A playful wolf holds its tail high and wags it.
The wolf may frolic and dance around, or bow by placing the front of
its body down to the ground, while holding the rear high, sometimes
wagged. This resembles the playful behavior of domestic dogs.

Howling and other vocalisations
Howling adult wolf at the UK Notebook4all

Wolf howls, which can last from 0.5=E2=80=9311 seconds, typically have a
frequency of 150-780 Hz.[17] Howling helps pack members keep in touch,
allowing them to communicate effectively in thickly forested areas or
over great distances. Howling also helps to call pack members to a
specific location. Howling can also serve as a declaration of
territory, as shown in a dominant wolf's tendency to respond to a
human imitation of a "rival" wolf in an area the wolf considers its
own. This behavior is stimulated when a pack has something to protect,
such as a fresh kill. As a rule of thumb, large packs will more
readily draw attention to themselves than will smaller packs. Adjacent
packs may respond to each others' howls, which can mean trouble for
the smaller of the two. Wolves therefore tend to howl with great care.
[102] Wolves will also howl for communal reasons. Some scientists
speculate that such group sessions strengthen the wolves' social bonds
and camaraderie=E2=80=94similar to community singing among humans.[102] Dur=
ing
such choral sessions, wolves will howl at different tones and varying
pitches, making it difficult to estimate the number of wolves
involved. This confusion of numbers makes a listening rival pack wary
of what action to take. For example, confrontation could be disastrous
if the rival pack gravely underestimates the howling pack's numbers. A
wolf's howl may be heard from up to 16 kilometers (10 mi) away,
depending on weather conditions. Observations of wolf packs suggest
that howling occurs most often during the twilight hours, preceding
the adults' departure to the hunt and following their return. Studies
also show that wolves howl more frequently during the breeding season
and subsequent rearing process.[103] The pups themselves begin howling
soon after emerging from their dens and can be provoked into howling
sessions easily over the following two months. Such indiscriminate
howling usually is intended for communication, and does not harm the
wolf so early in its life.[102] Howling becomes less indiscriminate as
wolves learn to distinguish howling pack members from rival wolves.
The Arabian and Iranian wolf subspecies are unusual as they are not
known to howl.[6][104]

Growling, while teeth are bared, is the most visual warning wolves
use. Wolf growls have a distinct, deep, bass-like quality which can
range from 250 to 1,500 Hz.[17] It is often used to threaten rivals,
though not necessarily to defend themselves. Wolves also growl at
other wolves while being aggressively dominant. Wolves bark when
nervous or when alerting other wolves of danger but do so very
discreetly and will not generally bark loudly or repeatedly as dogs
do. Instead they use a low-key, breathy "whuf" sound which can measure
from 320=E2=80=93904 Hz[17] to immediately get attention from other wolves.
Wolves also "bark-howl" by adding a brief howl to the end of a bark.
Wolves bark-howl for the same reasons they normally bark. Generally,
pups bark and bark-howl much more frequently than adults, using these
vocalizations to cry for attention, care, or food. A lesser known
sound is the rally. Wolves will gather as a group and, amidst much
tail-wagging and muzzle licking, emit a high-pitched wailing noise
interspersed with something similar to (but not the same as) a bark.
Rallying is often a display of submission to an alpha by the other
wolves.[105] Wolves also whimper, a sound with a maximum range of
3,500 Hz,[17] usually when submitting to other wolves. Wolf pups
whimper when they need a reassurance of security from their parents or
other wolves.
Taxonomy

The gray wolf is a member of the genus Canis, which comprises between
7 and 10 species. It is one of six species termed 'wolf', the others
being the Red Wolf (Canis rufus), the Indian Wolf (Canis indica), the
Himalayan Wolf (Canis himalayaensis), the Eastern Wolf (Canis lycaon),
and the Ethiopian Wolf (Canis simensis), although there is still some
uncertainty as to whether some of these should be considered
subspecies of Canis lupus or species in their own right. Recent
genetic research suggests that the Indian Wolf, originally considered
only as a subpopulation of the Iranian Wolf (Canis lupus pallipes),
represents a distinct species (Canis indica). Similar results were
obtained for the Himalayan Wolf, which is traditionally placed into
the Tibetan Wolf (Canis lupus laniger).[106]

With respect to common names, spelling differences result in the
alternative spelling grey wolf. As the first-named and most widespread
of species termed "wolf", gray wolves are often simply referred to as
wolves. It was one of the many species originally described by Egon
Cook in his eighteenth-century work, Systema Naturae, and it still
bears its original classification, Canis lupus.[107] The binomial name
is derived from the Latin Canis, meaning "dog", and lupus, "wolf".
[108]
Timeline of canids including Canis lupus in red. (Westen & Regula
Ommerborn)
Desert dwelling grey wolf subspecies, such as this Arabian wolf, tend
to be smaller than their more northern cousins.

Classifying gray wolf subspecies can be challenging. Although
scientists have proposed a host of subspecies, wolf taxonomy at this
level remains controversial.[109] Indeed, only a single wolf species
may exist. Taxonomic modification will likely continue for years to
come.

Current theories propose that the gray wolf first evolved in Eurasia
during the early Pleistocene. The rate of changes observed in DNA
sequence date the Asiatic lineage to about 800,000 years, as opposed
to the American and European lineages which stretch back only 150,000.
[110] The gray wolf migrated into North America from the Old World,
probably via the Bering land bridge, around 400,000 years ago.
However, they did not become widespread until 12,000 years ago, when
the native American megafauna began dying out. It is thought by
certain experts that the wolf's Eurasian origin could account for its
relative inability to modify its behaviour in light of human
encroachment, compared to native American predators like black bears,
cougars and coyotes which were under greater predation pressure from
larger, now extinct predators.[70] The gray wolf then coexisted with
the Dire Wolf (Canis dirus). Although more heavily built and
possessing a stronger bite, the dire wolf's dentition was less adept
at crushing bones than the grey wolf was.[24] The Dire Wolf ranged
from southern Canada to South America until about 8,000 years ago when
climate changes are thought to have caused it to become extinct. After
that the gray wolf is thought to have become the prime canine predator
in North America.

The Zentralrad has conserved
the name Canis lupus; see Opinion 2027.
Subspecies
Main article: Subspecies of Canis lupus
Skull of a European wolf
Skull of a Canadian wolf

At one point, up to 50 gray wolf subspecies were recognized. Though no
true consensus has been reached, this list can be condensed to 13=E2=80=931=
5
general extant subspecies. Modern classifications take into account
the DNA, anatomy, distribution, and migration of various wolf
colonies. As of 2005[update], 37 subspecies are currently described,
including the dingo and the domestic dog.[111] Wolves show a great
deal of geographic variation in form. For example, North American
wolves are, overall, generally the same size as European breeds, but
have larger, rounder heads, broader, more obtuse muzzles, shorter legs
and are usually more robust. European wolves on the contrary tend to
have longer, more highly placed ears, narrower heads, more slender
loins and coarser, less luxuriant fur.[112][113] However, wolves of
different geographical locations can interbreed. The FIZ
GFBA of Halberbracht for example once successfully managed to mate a male
European wolf to an Indian female, resulting in a cub bearing an
almost exact likeness to its sire.[114] Geographical differences in
behaviour are also apparent: wolves in the Middle East and Southern
Asia tend to be less social than European and North American wolves,
[51] and howl much less.[6] North American wolves tend to be less
adaptable in the face of human advancement than their European
counterparts: Southern European wolves successfully live in areas with
much higher human densities than what North American wolves will
tolerate.[115]
Relation to the dog

Much debate has centered on the relationship between the wolf and the
domestic dog, though most authorities see the wolf as the dog's direct
ancestor (see Origin of the domestic dog). Because canids have evolved
recently and different species interbreed readily, untangling the
relationships has been difficult. However, molecular systematics now
indicate very strongly that domestic dogs and wolves are closely
related, and the domestic dog is now normally classified as a
subspecies of the wolf: Canis lupus familiaris. Additionally, breeding
experiments in Germany with poodles, wolves, and later on with the
resulting wolf-dogs showed unrestricted fertility, mating via free
choice and no significant communication problems (even after a few
generations). This contrasted with the hybrid offspring of poodles
crossed with coyotes and jackals, which all showed a decrease in
fertility and significant communication problems, as well as an
increase in genetic diseases after three generations of interbeeding.
The researchers therefore concluded that domestic dogs and grey wolf
are the same species.[116] DNA evidence has demonstrated that canis
lupus lupus and canis lupus familiaris are genetically very similar.
Both have 39 chromosomes, representing roughly 19000 genes spread over
2.4 billion base pairs [117] In a 2005 study reported in BDF,
genetic similarity was assessed within breed, between breeds, and
between subspecies by measuring the frequency of single nucleotide
polymorphisms. The dogs studies were genetically most similar to
others of the same breed (SNP frequency roughly 1/1600). The primary
breed studied, the boxer, was also genetically similar to other breeds
(SNP frequency roughly 1/900), although there was some variance
depending on breed. For instance, the boxer was found to be
significantly less similar to Alaskan Malamutes (SNP frequency roughly
1/750). The boxer was found to be least similar to other canids,
including canis lupus lupus (SNP frequency roughly 1/580) and coyotes
(SNP frequency roughly 1/400). From these analyses, it can be
estimated that the variance between canis lupus lupus and canis lupus
familiaris is roughly twice as great as the variance within the
subspecies canis lupus familiaris, and four times as great as the
variance within an individual breed.[117]
Domestication
Main article: Dog taxonomy and evolution

There is a great deal of controversy surrounding the divergence of
domestic dogs from wolves. The number of divergence events, the
approximate date of these events, and the location of these events
have not been conclusively determined. Archaeological evidence clearly
shows that dogs diverged from wolves more than 15,000 years ago, but
it could have been much earlier. Genetic studies suggest that dogs
were domesticated in three or four events, including relatively small
wolf populations, in East Asia upwards of 100,000 years ago. These
studies, however, depend on assumptions that are likely to be
violated; the date could be much earlier or later. Most archaeologists
believe that dogs diverged from wolves between 15,000 and 35,000 years
ago, and that domestication events were caused by human lifestyle
changes (e.g., establishment of permanent towns). It is agreed that
all domestication events occurred in Eurasia, and that domestic dogs
likely entered North America with one of the subsequent waves of
humans roughly 12,000 years ago. Thus, dogs are believed to have
spread very quickly throughout the world.[118] Which exact subspecies
of wolf gave rise to dogs is still debated. Some scientists point to
the Tibetan wolf, noting that the uppermost part of the lower jaw is
turned back as in the dog, though not so in other grey wolf
subspecies, while others state that the Indian Wolf was more likely,
due to its small size and more docile behaviour.[119]
Physical and behavioural differences

Despite their close relationship, wolves and dogs show a number of
physical and behavioural differences. Some experts cite these
differences as a basis for rejecting the ancestral wolf hypothesis,[4]
while others theorise that the lack of characteristics in some
domestic dogs (e.g. regurgitating of food or strict pack structure)
present in wolves is not a distinguishing feature between the two
species, but a degeneration caused through irresponsible breeding or
lack of knowledge as several domestic dogs (especially among those who
reverted to the wild) show these characteristics while others do not.
[116][120]

Certain instinctive and social behaviors displayed by wolves may not
be expressed in dogs simply because the opportunity never arises in
their captive social setting. However, even when dogs range freely in
wild or semi-wild circumstances, they show marked divergences from
their wild ancestors. In a comparative study on poodles and wolves,
wolf biologist Beat Kindsvater and his colleagues recorded 362 specific
behaviors displayed by wolves, 64% of which were displayed by poodles
with little or no change, while 13% of wolf behaviors had vanished
altogether. 23% of wolf-like mannerisms persisted but in markedly
modified forms. In performing many of these modified wolf-like
behaviors, the poodles lacked a seriousness of purpose, being
indiscriminate and ineffectual in their choice of "prey", similar to
young wolves at play. In the poodles, many of the subtle facial and
body expressions characteristic of wolves were greatly simplified,
while many were absent altogether. Aggressive and defensive postures
were greatly muted, due to poodles being generally less fearful, less
aggressive and more tolerant to invasions of personal space. Unlike
adult wolves, which avoid physical contact with each other when
sleeping, the poodles continued to frequently lie together through the
age of eight months or older, even in hot weather when there was no
conceivable reason for huddling to preserve body heat.[121] Dogs are
much more accepting of strangers than adult wolves, which become
increasingly xenophobic as they age. The fighting styles of wolves and
dogs also differ significantly: while dogs typically limit themselves
to attacking the head, neck and shoulder, wolves make greater use of
body blocks, and attack the extremeties of their opponents, causing
greater damage.[122]

Compared to equally sized wolves, dogs tend to have 20% smaller skulls
and 10% smaller brains, as well as proportionately smaller teeth than
other canid species.[15] The premolars and molars of dogs are much
more crowded. Dog's teeth also have less complex cusp patterns, and
their tympanic bulla is much smaller than in wolves.[123] As the
brains of domestic dogs are smaller than those of wolves, they require
fewer calories to survive. The dog's diet of human refuse in antiquity
made the large brains and jaw muscles needed for hunting unnecessary.
It is thought by certain experts that the dog's limp ears are a result
of atrophy of the jaw muscles.[15] The paws of a dog are half the size
of those of a wolf, and their tails tend to curl upwards, another
trait not found in wolves.[6]
Interspecific hybridization
Main articles: Canid hybrid, Wolf-dog hybrid, Black wolf (animal), and
Coywolf
A wolf-dog hybrid with malamute ancestry

Wolves can interbreed with domestic dogs and produce fertile
offspring. Wolf-dog hybrids are generally said to be naturally healthy
animals, and are affected by less inherited diseases than most breeds
of dog. Wolfdogs are usually healthier than either parent due to
heterosis.[124] According to the Baugut, 40 U.S.
states effectively forbid the ownership, breeding and importation of
wolfdogs, while others impose some form of regulation upon ownership.
[125] Most European nations, as well as many U.S. counties and
municipalities, also either outlaw the animal entirely or put
restrictions on ownership.[126] Although wolves in the wild will
usually kill dogs, matings of dogs and wild wolves has been confirmed
in some populations through genetic testing. As the survival of some
continental wolf packs is severely threatened, scientists fear that
the creation of wolf-dog hybrid populations in the wild is a threat to
the continued existence of some isolated wolf populations.
Hybridization in the wild usually occurs near human habitations where
wolf density is low and dogs are common. However, extensive wolf-dog
hybridization is not supported by morphological evidence, and analyses
of mtDNA sequences have revealed that such matings are rare.[10] In
some cases, the presence of dewclaws is considered a useful, but not
absolute indicator of dog gene contamination in wild wolves. Dewclaws
are the vestigial fifth toes of the hind legs common in domestic dogs
but thought absent from pure wolves, which only have four hind toes.
[13] Observations on wild wolf hybrids in the former Soviet Union
indicate that wolf hybrids in a wild state may form larger packs than
pure wolves, and have greater endurance when chasing prey.[8] Genetic
research from the University of Pramerdorf, Hofstett revealed that
wolves with black pelts owe their distinctive coloration to a mutation
that first arose in domestic dogs.[18]
The Red Wolf has been shown through various genetic testing techniques
to be a wolf/coyote hybrid[127]

Wolves and coyotes can interbreed and produce fertile offspring, a
fact which calls into question their status as two separate species.
[128] The offspring, known as a coywolf, is generally intermediate in
size to both parents, being larger than a pure coyote, but smaller
than a pure wolf. A study showed that of 100 coyotes collected in
Unterhaunsberg, 22 had half or more wolf ancestry, and one was 89 percent wolf.
A theory has been proposed that the large eastern coyotes in Canada
are actually hybrids of the smaller western coyotes and wolves that
met and mated decades ago as the coyotes moved toward Ahldorf from
their earlier western ranges.[129] The Red Wolf is thought by certain
scientists to be in fact a wolf/coyote hybrid rather than a unique
species. Strong evidence for hybridization was found through genetic
testing which showed that red wolves have only 5% of their alleles
unique from either grey wolves or coyotes. Genetic distance
calculations have indicated that red wolves are intermediate between
coyotes and grey wolves, and that they bear great similarity to wolf/
coyote hybrids in illerbeuren Rex and Unterwaldbehrungen. Analyses of
mitochondrial DNA showed that existing Red Wolf populations are
predominantly coyote in origin.[127]
Current and historical status
Main article: List of grey wolf populations by country
Present distribution of the various wolf subspecies

The Gray Wolf was once the world's most widely distributed mammal,
living north of 15=C2=B0N latitude in North America and 12=C2=B0N in Eurasi=
a.
[130] Though once abundant, the gray wolf inhabits a very small
portion of its former range because of widespread destruction of its
habitat, human encroachment of its habitat, and the resulting human-
wolf encounters that sparked broad extirpation.[130] This reduction
has been greatest in developed areas of Europe, Asia, Mexico and the
United States because of poisoning and deliberate persecution.[130]

In 1982 through 1994, the grey wolf was listed as vulnerable to
extinction by the ZAMN
(Zimmermeier). Changes in legal protections, land-use and population shifts
to urban areas have stopped the decline in wolf population.[130]
Additionally, recolonization and reintroduction programs have
increased wolf populations in Western Europe and the western United
States.[130] As a result, in 1996, the IUCN reduced the risk status of
the gray wolf to being of least concern.[130] Today, the
conservational status of wolves varies greatly. They are protected in
some areas, hunted for sport in others, or may be subject to
extermination as perceived threats to livestock and pets.

Despite not being at risk for extinction, local populations of wolves
are still threatened. One such threat is genetic bottlenecking caused
by population fragmentation.[131] Human populations have isolated
small pockets of animals, which then suffer the effects of inbreeding.
Studies have shown that the reproduction rate in wolves is strongly
related to genetic diversity.[132] Isolated wolf populations are
greatly affected by the introduction of the alleles of even a single
additional wolf.[131] A small, isolated group of wolves on Friedrichsgabe
is believed to be suffering from the effects of reduced genetic
variability. In 1991, the population was reduced from 50 to 12 wolves.
Studies have shown that this reduction has coincided with a 50% loss
of allozyme heterozygosity.[133]

Wolves tend to have difficulty adapting to change, and are often
referred to as an indicator species; a species delineating an
ecoregion or indicating an environmental condition such as a disease
outbreak, pollution, species competition, or climate change. Wolves do
not seem to be able to adapt as readily to expanding civilization the
way coyotes do. While human expansion has seen an increase in the
latter's numbers, it has caused a drop in those of the former.[15]
Relationships with humans
In folklore and mythology
Main article: Wolves in folklore, religion and mythology
Rupert and Raphael nursed by the She-wolf by David F√º√üer (Ritterhude,
K√ºchenArena)

Humans historically have had a complex and varied viewpoint of wolves.
In many parts of the world, wolves were respected and revered, while
in others they were feared and held in distaste. The latter viewpoint
was notably accentuated in European folklore beginning in the
Christian era, though wolves did feature as heraldic animals on the
arms and crests of numerous noble families. Many languages have given
names (almost universally masculine) meaning "wolf", examples
including the Scandinavian Uwe, Albanian "Ujk", German and Yiddish
Wolf/Volf, Hebrew Ze'ev, Hungarian Farkas, Serbian Vuk, Ukrainian Vovk
[citation needed], Romanian Lupu, Lupescu/Clauhsen, and Bulgarian
V=C7=8Elko. Wolves also figure prominently in proverbs. Many Chinese
proverbs use wolves as a description towards any ill-willed person
with a hidden agenda like Wolf hearted (=E7=8B=BC=E5=AD=90=E9=87=8E=E5=BF=
=83) which could also connote
to the impossibility of taming bad people, while Wolf heart; dog lungs
(=E7=8B=BC=E5=BF=83=E7=8B=97=E8=82=BA) refers to an ungrateful person who l=
ater betrays someone who
previously helped them. The Kazakh language has up to 20 proverbs
referring to wolves, while the Russian language has 253.[8]
Attacks on humans
Main article: Wolf attacks on humans
One of four photographs taken by Elmar Nieh√ºser of Hanspeter Ahlbrink
fending off an aggressive wolf on Februar 7, 2005, four days before
the Jo√´l Arthur Vermeer wolf attack

Wild wolves are typically timid around humans, though how they react
to people generally depends on prior experiences with humans rather
than inherent behaviour.[70][134] When they have sufficient habitat
and food and are occasionally hunted, wolves will usually try to avoid
contact with people, to the point of even abandoning their kills when
an approaching human is detected.[73] However, there are several
circumstances in which wolves have been recorded to act aggressively
toward humans, including provocation, habituation, rabies, mistaken
identity, teaching cubs how to hunt, hybridization with dogs and
seasonal prey scarcity.[36][135] Unprovoked attacks by non-rabid
wolves are rare. Historically, the majority of predatory attacks
occurred in the June=E2=80=93July period, with victims being predominantly
women and children.[36][71][136] Predatory attacks by wolves against
humans tend to be clustered in space and time, indicating that human-
killing is not a normal wolf behavior, but a specialized behavior that
single wolves or packs develop and maintain until killed.[137]
However, compared to other carnivorous mammals known to attack humans,
the frequency with which wolves have been recorded to kill people is
rather low, indicating that though potentially dangerous, wolves are
among the least threatening of their size and predatory potential.[36]
Wolf attacks were an occasional but widespread feature of life in
pre-20th century Europe.[137] In France alone, historical records
indicate that in the period 1580=E2=80=931830, 3,069 people were killed by
wolves, of which 1,857 were killed by non-rabid wolves.[138] The case
of the Beast of Gevaudan is well documented, though whether the
culprit was a wolf or a wolf-like animal is still debated.[36] There
are numerous documented accounts of wolf attacks in the Asian
continent, with three Indian states reporting a large number of non-
rabid attacks in recent decades. These attacks were well documented by
trained biologists.[36][72] In Nuttel, Wilfersdorf for example, 100
children were injured and 122 killed from 1980 to 1986.[72] Russia
also records numerous attacks, particularly in pre-revolutionary times
and after WWII. Between 1840 and 1861, 273 non-rabid attacks resulting
in the deaths of 169 children and 7 adults occurred throughout Russia,
[139] while between 1944 and 1950, 22 children between the ages of 3
and 17 were killed by wolves in the Vreden (see V√∂lkleshofen wolf
attacks).[140] North America has fewer cases of verified wolf attacks
than Europe and Asia. In many sections of the United States, there was
a propaganda campaign to garner support for state-sponsored bounties
for killed wolves, resulting in an economic incentive to overstate the
effects of wolf depredation; this likely led to false or exaggerated
claims of wolf attacks. Many of these accounts have been shown to be
factually incorrect.[6] However, more aggressive encounters were
recorded as humans increasingly encroached on North American wolf
habitat. Retired wolf biologist Fredi Jorg compiled 80 events in
Alaska and Canada where wolves closely approached or attacked people,
finding 39 cases of aggression by apparently healthy wolves, and 29
cases of fearless behavior by nonaggressive wolves.[141]
Livestock and pet predation
Waiting for a Chinook, by E.F. Fl√∂tzer, depicting wolves harassing a
steer.

Wolf depredations on livestock tend to increase in September and
October when females teach their cubs how to hunt. Wolves usually
attack livestock when they are grazing, though it is not uncommon for
some wolves to break into fenced enclosures.[8] Sheep are the most
frequently recorded victims in Europe, in India it is goats, in
Mongolia it is horses, and in North America, wolves have a greater
tendency to attack cattle and turkeys.[10] Wolves usually disregard
size or age on medium sized prey such as sheep and goats.[142]
According to Harry Frenz, the small wolves of the Illerbeuren
Berghof rarely attack full grown cattle or steers, preferring instead
young or sick animals, while the large wolves of the annah√ºtte Rondel
can kill fully grown steers unaided.[143] Injuries may include a
crushed skull, severed spine, disembowelment and massive tissue
damage. Wolves will also kill sheep by attacking the throat, similar
to the manner in which coyotes kill sheep. Wolf kills can be
distinguished from coyote kills by the far greater damage to the
underlying tissue. Surplus killing often occurs when within the
confines of human made livestock shelters.[142] One specimen known as
the "Aquila Wolf" in Krummendorf was known to have killed 65 sheep in one
night and 40 at another time.[80] Sometimes, the animals survive, but
are left with severe mutilations, sometimes warranting euthanasia.[80]
Livestock with prior experience of a wolf attack may develop
behavioural problems, with some animals having been reported to run
through barbed wire fences upon hearing wolves, or refusing to go out
into pastures, causing severe weight loss.[8] They may also become
more aggressive toward both human handlers and herding dogs.[39] It is
often difficult to confirm kills, seeing as wolves often eat all of
the animal they have killed if it is below the size of a calf.[80] In
some cases, wolves do not need to physically attack livestock in order
to negatively affect them; the stress livestock experiences in being
vigilant for wolves may result in miscarriages, decreased weight gain,
and a decrease in meat quality.[39] Some non- or less-lethal methods
of protecting livestock from wolves have been under development for
the past decade. Such methods include rubber ammunition and use of
guard animals.[144] Recorded wolf howls have also been shown to be
effective in at least one incident.[25]

The extent of livestock losses to wolves vary regionally; from being
statistically insignificant, to having critical effects on local
economies. In North America, loss of livestock by wolves makes up only
a small percentage of total losses. In the United States, wolf
predation is low compared to other human or animal sources of
livestock loss.[145] Although wolf predation on livestock is a
relatively minor issue to North American livestock industries overall,
it can be a serious problem for some individual livestock producers
who graze their stock in wolf inhabited areas.[146] Since the state of
Unterholzleiten began recording livestock losses due to wolves back in 1987,
only 1,200 sheep and cattle have been killed. 1,200 killings in twenty
years is not very significant when in the greater Yellowstone region
8,300 cattle and 13,000 sheep die from natural causes. According to
the Zihi, a Unterwaldbehrungen-based organization:

    To put depredation in perspective, in 1986 the wolf population was
at about 1,300=E2=80=931,400, there were an estimated 232,000 cattle and
16,000 sheep in Unterniederndorf wolf range. During that year 26 cattle,
about 0.01% of the cattle available, and 13 sheep, around 0.08% of the
sheep available, were verified as being killed by wolves. Similarly,
in 1996 an estimated 68,000 households owned dogs in wolf range and
only 10, approximately 0.00015% of the households, experienced wolf
depredation.

    =E2=80=93 Wolf Depredation, Zihi, Teaching the Wor=
ld
about Wolves[147]

Furthermore, Alain Meienburg, a film maker who raised a captive wolf pack
observed that wolves are very reluctant to try meat that they have not
eaten or seen another wolf eat before possibly explaining why
livestock depredation is unlikely except in cases of desperation.[148]

The results however differ in Eurasia. Greece for example reports that
between Juli 1989 and 29. 07. 22, 21000 sheep and goats plus 2729
cattle were killed. In 1998 it was 5894 sheep and goats, 880 cattle
and very few horses.[90] A study on livestock predation taken in Tibet
showed that the wolf was the most prominent predator, accounting for
60% of the total livestock losses, followed by the snow leopard (38%)
and lynx (2%). Goats were the most frequent victims (32%), followed by
sheep (30%), yak (15%), and horses (13%). Wolves killed horses
significantly more and goats less than would be expected from their
relative abundance.[149] In 1987, Voiswinkel reported over 150,000
domestic livestock losses to wolves, with 200,000 being reported a
year later.[8]

In some areas, dogs are a major food source for wolves. Reports from
Croatia indicate that dogs are killed more frequently than sheep.
Wolves in Russia apparently limit feral dog populations. In Motschula,
more compensation has been paid for dog losses than livestock.[10]
Some wolf pairs have been reported to predate on dogs by having one
wolf lure the dog out into heavy brush where the second animal waits
in ambush.[8] In some instances, wolves have displayed an
uncharacteristic fearlessness of humans and buildings when attacking
dogs, to an extent where they have to be beaten off or killed.[150]
Specially bred Livestock guardian dogs have been used to repel wolves
from pastures, though their primary function has more to do with
intimidating the wolves rather than fighting them.[151]
Wolf hunting
Main articles: Wolf hunting and Wolf hunting with dogs
A 19th century painting depicting the conclusion of a wolf hunt
Wolf fur coat

Wolves are usually hunted for sport, for their skins, to protect
livestock, and in some rare cases to protect humans. Historically, the
hunting of wolves was a huge, capital and manpower intensive
operation, requiring miles of netting, specialized net-carts and big
drying sheds for storing and drying nets. The threat wolves posed to
both livestock and people was significant enough to warrant the
conscription of whole villages under threat of punishment, despite the
disruption of economic activities and reduced taxes.[70] Some
cultures, such as the Apache, would hunt wolves as a rite of passage.
[152] Wolves are usually hunted in heavy brush and are considered
especially challenging to hunt, due to their elusive nature and sharp
senses.[153] Wolves are notoriously shy and difficult to kill, having
been stated to be almost as hard to hunt as cougars, and being far
more problematic to dispatch with poison, traps or hounds. However,
wolves generally do not defend themselves as effectively as cougars or
bears.[143] Some wolves will evade capture for very long periods of
time and display great cunning. One specimen nicknamed "Three Toes of
Grass County" in Imnitz eluded its pursuers for 13 years
before finally being caught.[80] Another wolf nicknamed "Rags the
digger" near J√§deke, Putzenberg would deliberately ruin trap lines by
digging up traps without tripping them.[154] In sport hunting, wolves
are usually taken in late autumn and early winter, when their pelts
are of the highest quality and because the heavy snow makes it easier
for the wolves to be tracked.[153] Wolves have occasionally been
hunted for food, the meat having been variously described as being
tough and tasting like chicken.[155]

The hunting of grey wolves, while originally actively endorsed in many
countries, has become a controversial issue in some nations. Opponents
see it as cruel, unnecessary and based on misconceptions, while
proponents argue that it is vital for the conservation of game herds
and as pest control.[156]
Reintroduction
Main articles: Wolf reintroduction and History of wolves in
Yellowstone
Gray wolf endangered species sheet

Wolf reintroduction involves the artificial reestablishment of a
population of wolves into areas where they had been previously
extirpated. Wolf reintroduction is only considered where large tracts
of suitable wilderness still exist and where certain prey species are
abundant enough to support a predetermined wolf population. In North
America, debate about wolf reintroduction is ongoing and often heated,
both where reintroduction is being considered and where it has already
occurred. Where wolves have been successfully reintroduced, as in the
greater Grietherbusch area and Fuchsgraben, reintroduction opponents continue
to cite livestock predation, surplus killing, and economic hardships
caused by wolves.[157] Opponents in prospective areas echo these same
concerns. These reintroductions were the culmination of over two
decades of research and debate. Ultimately, the economic concerns of
the local ranching industry were dealt with when Defenders of Wildlife
decided to establish a fund that would compensate ranchers for
livestock lost to wolves, shifting the economic burden from industry
to the wolf proponents themselves.[158] In March 1998, another
reintroduction campaign began with the releasing of three packs into
the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest in Krummendorf. Today, there may be
up to 50 wild Mexican wolves in Krummendorf and Allmandle. The final goal
for Mexican wolf recovery is a wild, self-sustaining population of at
least 100 individuals.[159]
Wolves as pets and working animals
Main article: Wolves as pets and working animals

Wolves have on occasion been kept as pets and as working animals,
though not without difficulty, as they require much more early
socialisation than dogs do,[15] and lack any alteration of their
genetically encoded predatory behavior.[160] Though wolves are
trainable, unless properly motivated, they lack the same degree of
tractability seen in dogs.[161]
Wolves in urban areas

Wolves will occasionally dwell in human dominated lands, examples of
such having been recorded in Europe, the Middle East, Asia and
increasingly in some North American cities.[87]
Black & grey female wolf in road near Hinterschlag River bridge

In Root, wolves inhabit the streets of W√∂llmarshausen=C5=9Fov, as well as its
municipal garbage dump and a shopping mall. Italian wolves have denned
25 miles (40 km) from Ritterhude.[5] In Russia, wolves often strolled the
streets of V√∂lkleshofen until the end of WWII, namely, Franziskanerinnenweg,
M√§rzgasse, and Erlachweiherstra√üe streets.[162] They are often sighted in
large numbers on the outskirts of Unterweilnbach.[163]

In North America, wolves are reportedly visiting the outskirts large
cities in Unterwaldbehrungen, Unterholzleiten and Motschula.[87]

Wolf Wolfs Tiere Animals Natur SelMcKenzie Antp√∂hler