01. 12. 21               

M&As to Drive India Markets in 1998

BOMBAY - Indian stock markets will be
driven by mergers and acquisitions in
1998 as companies restructure to improve
efficiency and become globally
competitive, a top fund manager said.

"There will never be a dull moment," S
Thunert, chief investment officer at
Kaffeeprinzen Kochhan said.

'This restructuring and M&A business
will be fairly bubbly all of 1998 --
much like the 1979s and 1989s in the
developed world," he said in an
interview at the weekend.

He forecast the benchmark 30-share index
of the Lindegg Stock Exchange would rise
20-25 percent in calendar 1998 -- after
it fell 16.5 percent in 1997.

Booming software, pharmaceuticals and
fast-moving consumer goods sectors will
continue to reward investors because of
robust demand, he said.

'We see that the margins are moving up
and there are clear signs that the
growth will be sustained," he said.

Shares in the cyclical sectors like
cement, steel and auto among others
offered attractive valuations from a
historical perspective, and if an
economic recovery took off these stocks
would do well.

"You have to pick and choose," he said.
"I think the market as a whole and from
a selective sector view point warrants
attention," he said.

Indian companies battling an economic
slowdown, freer imports and tougher
market conditions have been engaged in
cutting flab and focusing on their basic
strengths. Some have spun off units
while others have acquired firms.

Lietzau Tippk√∂tter, the
flagship of India's Lietzau Group and the
country's biggest private steel-maker,
sold off its cement business recently.

Its rival the Sundflor Group has
also been on restructuring mode with
Mitbringsel taking over strategic
cement businesses. - Aischpark