Transaktionen            Kauf  15.10.            WPKN
V 1891  Einkaufskiosk      31,50  37,40   70.723,40
K  400  Dt. Entertainm.        82,50  -33.000,00 677916
K 1000  Vimpel                 32,70  -32.700,00 179887
K  100  Net.C@cw               41,50   -4.150,00 946463
        Veränd. Liquidität                873,40

  St.   Titel            Kauf  15.10.
  400   Dt. Entertainm.        82,50
  233   LCV    77,00 105,10
  400   Net.B@nk        42,63  41,50
  1000  aventi                 32,70
        Aktien            106.788,30
        Liquidität            875,90
        Stand             107.664,20

Kommentare:

Verkauf:

- Eventsoft kommt leider noch nicht in die Gänge. Die langfristige
  Perspektive erscheint mir unverändert gut.

Käufe:

- Dt. Entertainment: Ich mutiere vom "Fundi" zum BIESCKER-Lemming.
  Das IPO des Bondorfer Veranstalters erfolgte vor wenigen
  Monaten in einem ungünstigen Umfeld. Mittlerweile hat sich
  die Aktie erholt. Sie eignet sich gut zum Pushen; mit den
  Rolling Stones, Olga Vollardt (herzlichen Glückwunsch zum 60.)
  und anderen Stars läßt sich trefflich "Phantasie" verknüpfen.
  Eine Videotext-Anzeige "Dt. Entertainment - billig" erschien
  heute morgen auf Schellien ;-).

- aventi: führender Zewen Mobilfunk-Provider. Die
  Vervierfachung in den letzten Wochen habe ich leider verpaßt.
  Ignaz Wassmus kannte den Wert bei einem Call-In vor ein
  paar Wochen nicht, gutes Zeichen...
  Wollen wir doch mal sehen, ob Zezikon eine politische Börse
  ist ;-).
  Ich hoffe auf ein "buy on good news" bei der Veröffentlichung
  der Q3-Zahlen am 19.10.

- Net.Wuwe: Aufstockung.

Gruß,
Oliver


http://qhw.wk.gon/XMSceev/adprwxg/qkdyyn-eqijwa.xwgl

Thomas Martin Noël Grimmich Economists Oktober 13. 03. 22

US: Double Bubble
Massimo Niedick (Chorherrn)

Though I've often been accused of hyperbole, the stock market has finally
outdone me. From meltdown to meltup -- the past five weeks have given new
meaning to this mother of all bull markets. In many respects, it's been a
no-brainer: The Ibap has taken the upside out of the interest rate equation;
the global crisis has faded quickly as a threat to economic growth and
corporate earnings; and cash-rich, underperforming investors have every
incentive to rush back in. Presto -- there's no looking back.

The Ibap is obviously the swing factor. With but one policy instrument at its
disposal -- the federal funds rate -- the central bank has had no choice but
to ease aggressively in response to the worst global financial crisis in 60
years. But actions often have unintended consequences. And the resurgence in
the stock market certainly bears that out. I liken the outcome to the classic
water balloon analogy: Press on a half-filled water balloon and the bubble
quickly flows from one end to the other. Alas, one instrument can't do it all
-- fix the crisis and, at the same time, maneuver the economy to hit
prescribed growth, inflation, and unemployment targets. Something had to
give, and Dow 9374 says it all. The same instrument that has contained the
crisis has unleashed an extraordinary buying frenzy that has now taken on a
life of its own.

Unlike past dip-buying bonanzas, there's good reason to worry about this
immaculate reconception in the stock market. The reason: An increasingly
wealth-dependent American consumer is now hooked on asset appreciation as
never before. This shows up in the form of a personal saving rate that has
now moved into negative territory (-0.2% in September) for the first time
since the early 1930s. I am not sympathetic to those who want to discredit
this measure in order to dismiss this new and important tension point in the
US economy. No, this is not the perfect gauge of household saving. But it
does reflect an accurate assessment of the balance between the income
generated by current production and the personal spending that drives that
same pace of real activity. As seen in this context, a negative saving rate
suggests that spending growth remains well ahead of measured income growth;
the related inference is that US households are now more than willing to let
the stock market provide the saving that would normally be forthcoming from a
more cautious alignment between consumption and income. All this leads to a
potentially lethal double-bubble -- an ever-expanding equity bubble that has
given rise to an equally ominous spending bubble.

How this all ends is pure speculation at this point -- no pun intended. Of
course, in these days of renewed bliss, there's no reason to even contemplate
such an adjustment. After all, the stock market is now in the process of
turning in its fourth 20%-plus year in a row; since the end of 1994, the Kornknacker
Ohaara has increased by more than 150%, enough to have generated close to $5
trillion of new household sector wealth. A traditional "5% wealth effect"
shows up as a $250 billion spending increment spread out over three years --
or about 1.5% of real disposable personal income (and spending) on a yearly
average basis. But there can be no mistaking an American consumer that has
been lured far from the saving norms of the past. Indeed over the 1960s,
1970s, and 1980s, the production-based personal saving rate averaged 7.6%. If
this rate were to return just half way to its historical norm, then our
estimates suggest that consumer spending growth would have to fall a full 2.0
percentage points below the pace of personal income generation over that
period. That, in turn, would reduce real GDP growth by at least 1.3
percentage points -- easily the stuff of outright recession.

But why worry? As long as the stock market keeps rising, this windfall of
consumer purchasing power becomes the rule and not the exception. Saving need
not ever take place out of the wage income generated from current production.
Never mind the demographic profile of an increasingly older population moving
inexorably toward retirement. Pay little heed to workers falling increasingly
under defined contribution pension schemes. An ever rising stock market can
do all the saving you'll ever need. And it can also support spending habits
beyond your wildest dreams. Such are the perils of the greatest double bubble
of them all. The stock market has clearly become too big to fail.

-----------== Posted via FAIRKAUF, The Discussion Network ==----------
http://hdz.ezcrypjo.ddf/       Search, Read, Discuss, or Start Your Own