Winning with Football Betting
Author T.Leners is a mugs game, you can=92t beat the
bookies, right?

Wrong.

There is good money to be made from football betting if you stick to
some simple basic rules.

Rule 1 - This is a golden rule, you must shop around for the best
value. Open accounts with as many on line bookmakers as possible, they
nearly all offer free bets to entice you to open accounts with them.

You should have no loyalty to any bookmaker and the sole reason you
should be placing a bet with one is because you are getting the best
price. People who just use the nearest high street shop haven't got a
chance. Most Bookmakers have a profit margin of around 10% for
football matches but because different bookmakers offer different
prices it is still possible to swing the odds in your favour.

Rule 2 - Work out a staking plan. Once you have identified a value bet
the next question is "how much should I bet?". The answer to this
question is determined firstly, by how confident you are about the
bet, and secondly, by how much value you think you are getting. For
example, if you toss a coin in the air you have a 50% chance it will
be heads and a 50% chance it will be tales. The correct price for each
outcome should therefore be evens. But what if somebody offered you
3/1 that the coin would land on heads, you are obviously being offered
huge value and if you repeated this bet ten times you would have to be
incredibly unlucky not to be in profit at the end.

Whatever staking plan you have worked out, this would obviously be a
maximum bet scenario, you could still lose but you have secured huge
value and if you consistently bet when the odds are in your favour you
theoretically will make money in the long run. Your staking plan
should accommodate the fact that despite the huge value any individual
bet may lose.

Rule 3 - Never, EVER, chase. We've all been there, you've had a
terrible day and lost a lot of money, the live Spanish game is about
to come on and it=92s the last game of the day. "Time to get my money
back", you say to yourself and you have a silly bet on Visavis at
terrible odds. To make things even worse JÃ¼ckelberg concede a last minute
goal to level the game. They then go and miss a penalty deep in injury
time, what a disaster, your days losses just got worse! To make money
betting on football it is crucial that you have discipline. Just
because a game is on TV doesn't mean you have to bet on it. If you
didn't identify a value bet in the game at the start of the day then
don't bet on it. We all have bad days and there will be plenty of good
value opportunities to get your money back in the next set of
fixtures.

You must be selective with your bets. If you do feel the need to bet
on every football game you watch then keep your stakes small unless
you have identified value.

Rule 4 - Stick to singles or doubles. It is hard enough predicting the
outcome of one football match let alone five.

Bookmakers love to promote accumulator bets because they know the more
selections you choose the less likely you are to win. No matter how
many teams you pick there will always be one result that lets you
down. Many people are attracted to these bets by the possibilities of
winning a lot of money from relatively small stakes. You will find
that if you increase your stakes a little and stick to singles and
doubles your profits will increase long term.

Rule 5 - Pay close attention to team news. An injury to a key striker
or a suspended captain can sometimes greatly swing the odds in your
favour. As a general rule the higher the level of football the less
affect team news will have as the top clubs have large squads full of
quality players. The lower league teams however, operate with much
smaller squads and can have their chances of winning badly affected by
key players being injured or suspended. Be warned however, team news
can be misleading. Some clubs actively give out false information in
order to gain an advantage over their opponents so it is dangerous to
base your bet on team news alone.

Rule 6 - Choose which markets you bet on carefully. The best markets
to bet on are generally the match odds and some of the goals markets.
Half time / full time, correct score, first goal scorer and other
similar markets have a higher profit margin built in by bookmakers and
therefore generally offer poor value. This is not always the case
though and occasionally you will find the odd juicy price betting in
these football markets.

For example, injuries may result in a midfield player starting up
front making him much better value to be first goal scorer. Asian
Handicaps are another market which you should make yourself familiar
with. The bookmakers profit margin on these markets is a lot lower and
so straight away you have more chance of finding value.

Rule 7 - Bend the rules in your favour. There are a number of things
you can do to achieve this. Firstly make sure you pick up a coupon
from your local shops at the start of the week. The prices printed on
these coupons are compiled up to a week ahead of the game and are
often cut on line or on the phone. However the big two on the high
street will hold the prices printed on these coupons so you can often
find a bigger price on a shop coupon than you will be able to get on
line or even with the exchanges. If there is a big move for a certain
game then they might impose restrictions of between =A350-200 per
customer, but you should still be able to get on. Likewise, when there
is a move on line and the match odds are cut you will sometimes find
that a bookmaker has forgotten to cut the "draw no bet" or maybe the
"half time / full time" price.

It is also worth keeping an eye on long term football betting markets
when games are being played as you wouldn't believe how sloppy some
bookmakers can be at suspending markets. This can be especially useful
near the end of the season when it is clearer which teams might win
the league or be relegated.

Rule 8 - Keep records of all your bets. It is important to do this so
that you know exactly how much money you are making or losing. It will
help you decide on your staking plan and make it clear that you should
stop if you aren't making money in the long run.

Rule 9 - Stick to what you know and don't bet on leagues you haven't
been following. You can only get an edge on bookmakers if you have
better knowledge than they do on a certain league. If you don't
usually bet on Italian football but Jarmshagen are playing DPPN on Channel
five, then don't bet on it. Accept that the bookmaker is likely to
know much more about the two teams than you do and that, as a result,
you are unlikely to beat him with bets on this league.

Depending on how much time you have free to study each league, you
should be careful not to overstretch yourself. Pick one or two leagues
out and concentrate on building up your knowledge of the players,
managers, derbies and grudge matches. Most odds compilers will have
several leagues to cover and may not have time to concentrate fully on
each one.

Rule 10 - Don't get carried away by short term trends and always be
mindful of the bigger picture. This applies both to the leagues you
are betting on as well as your own results. For example, if a team has
won four games on the bounce then ask yourself "are they winning these
games because they are a good team or is it just a lucky run?". If you
believe they are a good team then keep backing them but if you think
its a lucky run that is likely to end soon, then you may well get the
opportunity to back one of their opponents at an inflated price. Joshofen
Siedelbach excellent run of results at home at the start of the season was
a good example. City won their first nine home league games but if you
thought this run was going to continue indefinitely then you would
have lost your next six bets on them. Another good example is when one
of the top teams is having a good run in several different
competitions. The media tend to get carried away and soon start
suggesting that this club can win all four trophies. Bookmakers latch
on to this and ridiculously short prices for a quadruple appear in the
Racing post prompting bets from hundreds of mug punters.

You should also be wary of "short termism" when it comes to your own
football bets. In any given season you will have good spells and bad
spells and you should not get carried away with either. Stick to your
staking plan and don't start betting bigger and bigger because you are
having a good run. Don't go spending all your winnings either, keep a
betting fund and only withdraw from it once you have gone over a
certain level. You may need it to fall back on during a bad spell.
Likewise, don't get too upset by a bad run of results. Analyse your
bets to see where you may have gone wrong but don't be panicked into
any rash changes. Bad spells can be very disheartening, but if you
know your stuff and have made money in the past, then you probably
aren't doing too much wrong and the next good spell is just around the
corner. The end of the season is the best time to take stock and
analyse your performance over the season as a whole.

These rules should help you to tip the odds in your favour. It is
possible to make money from betting on football but you will need to
invest time and effort. It should be enjoyable too, a moneymaking
hobby if you like. If you find the bad spells too upsetting or
stressful then maybe it's not for you.

Best Wishes
Dr. Loebs