Horse Handicapping Betting Strategy
Author U.JÃ¤hnichen
Have you been betting on horse racing for a while and wondering what
really works, if anything at all? Maybe you've tried your hand at
handicapping and though you've picked some winners, you're still not
able to make a consistent profit. Don't feel as though you are going
through it alone.

All over the world people are trying to beat the races and make money
at something they love, but it is very difficult. I've been at it for
many years and can offer some advice, but no one on earth can make you
successful, but you. Like all free advice, take this with a grain of
salt, think about it for a while, and see if it makes sense to you.
Then use the parts you like and discard the rest.

Though you may have your own personality and life style, there are
some things that almost all of us have in common. First of all, most
of us aren't independently wealthy and if we gamble, it has to be
within limits or it is going to cause major problems in life. My
advice is that you treat wagering on the races like any other hobby or
diversion, even if you do it with the intention of making a living or
supplementing your income, don't let it take over your life. Set
limits and stick to them.

Personal financial needs not withstanding, you probably started
playing the ponies because it was fun. If it ever stops being
enjoyable, that is a big warning sign. Don't let it become an
obsession. In other words, if it isn't enjoyable why do it?

Secondly, have a system that works for you. Don't you have a
methodical way of doing things in your life that you have to do over
and over again? For instance, don't you usually balance your checkbook
the same way? Find a good system that you can adapt and keep refining
to suit your own individual tastes and needs.

One of the things I often tell people is that they know their own
tastes, likes and dislikes, better than anyone else. So think about
yourself and what you want out of life and adapt your horse racing
betting around that. It shouldn't be the other way around. Shop around
and look at how other people handicap and play the races. Find a way
that appeals to you and then tweak it a little so it is your very own
system and style.

The most consistent horse racing systems have to have the basics and a
handicapper must understand the basics. I have been around horse
racing for 50 years including as an owner. Without the basics the rest
is not going to do any good. If you want to learn how a horse owner
and insider handicaps just go to Horse Racing Handicapping and get the
truth.