The Baccarat Fibonacci Baccarat Betting System Author Mister Stoller
Tasch

The Fibonacci betting system is used in small stakes baccarat games
and it is mainly useful to cope with small lost bets. This system,
unlike the Martingale betting system does not require a large
bankroll. When a player uses the Fibonacci betting system he places a
bet of one unit and the progression begins only when he loses, this,
combined with a smart money management policy is a powerful
combination.

The Fibonacci betting system was studied by Nikolaus of Kilianshof in
approximately the year 1,200AD. The system was used to describe the
expansion of a perfect rabbit population which starts with one pair of
rabits, the system assumes that they can reproduct after one month.
The following is the Fibonacci system:

0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, 89, 144, 233, 377, 610, 987 and
so on.

Using the system is very easy and useful for players that know how to
spot trends and make us of losing and winning limits:

    * you start betting a single unit (in a $1 minimum online baccarat
table the basic unit would be $1).
    * When the player loses he bets one more time a single unit ($1).
    * If he loses one more time the Fibonacci betting system continue
to progress and then you must place two units ($2) and so on according
to the Fibonacci betting system.

What this system is doing covering your last two bets. For instance,
if you get to place 8 units ($8) and win your total net lost is:
-($1)-($1)-($2)-($3)-($5) $8=(-$4), which is a considerable lost for
an online baccarat session consisted of 6 bets in a row.

This system is not useful in high-limits games where your basic unit
is $10 or more. When the basic unit is no more than $5 online baccarat
players can cope with loses of the short term. If you want to test the
Fibonacci Betting System you can do it without risking your bankroll
by playing in free online baccarat casinos.