Roulette Strategy The Garden System
Author Lamsfuhs

 EVERY SESSION CONSISTS OF TWO PARTS:


 1) The Selection Process.

 2) The Playing Period.


 1) The Selection Process:


 This is the first thing you do to start a session.

 If there are scoreboards in the tables where you play, it will save
you about 40 to 60 minutes of the selection process.

 Use the table's scoreboard and copy the numbers on paper, or write
them down as they hit if there is not scoreboard.

 You must write the numbers in the same order they hit.

 When a number repeats, circle it.

 What you need is a group of 24 different numbers, with at least 10 *
repeaters.( see UPDATE ) It could take from 34 to 56 outcomes to find
a group like this.

 Most times it takes about 50 outcomes

 Example:


 19, 1, 31, 21, 34, 8, 22, 25, 33, 16, 26, 28, 12, 9, 35, 13, 2, 7,
24, 29, 20, 18, 0, 11

 x x x x

 x x

 x


 In this example we have finished a selection process successfully.

 There are 10 repeaters, numbers 31, 34, 25, 16, 26, 12, 9, 2, 7, and
29.

 Now you are wondering what are those "x". Every "x" means a hit of
that number. So now you think: "Ok, so number 31 has hit 3 times".
That is wrong, number 31 has hit 5 times.

 Pay attention:

 First time number 31 hits, you write it down. Second time it hits,
you circled it. And every next time the number hits, you add it a
"x".

 Therefore: in the above example we have that, 31 has hit 5 times, 34
has hit 2 times, 25 has hit 2 times, 16 has hit 2 times, 26 has hit 3
times, 12 has hit 2 times, 9 has hit 4 times, 2 has hit 3 times, 7 has
hit 2 times, 29 has hit 2 times, and all the others numbers have hit
only 1 time.

 Later, you will learn why you need to know how many times a number
has hit.


 What if you come across with a non playable selection (less than 10
repeaters)?

 If you come across with a group of 24 numbers with less than 10
repeaters, that is a non playable selection.

 But don't worry, because it doesn't happen too often.

 Also you can track 2 tables at the same time, if you have the
chance.

 If you find a non playable selection, forget it and start a new one.
DO NOT PLAY IT.

 I know it could be disappointing to track about 34 to 56 outcomes and
then leave it, but I think Safety First.


 IMPROVEMENTS APPLIED TO "THE GARDEN" SYSTEM.


 To avoid so many unqualified sessions (the ones with less than 10
repeaters) I have tested and implemented a new rule.

 Originally, when you come across with a session with less than 10
repeaters, you should forget it and not play it.

 Well, I have changed that, and it has proved better results.

 Firstly, now the necessary amount of repeaters is not 10 anymore, but
9.

 Now with the new rule, when you come across with a session with less
than 9 repeaters, DO NOT FORGET IT.

 What you should do is the following:

 KEEP TRACKING UNTIL YOU GET 9 REPEATERS.

 While tracking add new numbers at the end of the string and cross out
the oldest number with only 1 hit (the closest one to the beginning of
the string). Do this until you have 9 repeaters. Remember that you
should ALWAYS HAVE ONLY 24 NUMBERS IN YOUR SELECTION.

 Do not forget to cross out the oldest number with only one hit every
time you add a new number to the string.

 Do not forget to circle repeaters numbers as they hit.

 Once you have your 9 repeaters, stop tracking and start the playing
period.


 2) The Playing Period:


 After you have a selection of 24 numbers, you start playing.

 You place flat bets in all 24 numbers.

 When you are ready to start and you have your chips, DO NOT BET THE
FIRST SPIN.

 To start playing you have to wait until what would have been a
winning happens, or until what would have been 3 loses in a row
happens, whatever comes first.

 Keep tracking these "would be" numbers, as instructed below.


 Lets continues with the above outcomes example:


 19, 1, 31, 21, 34, 8, 22, 25, 33, 16, 26, 28, 12, 9, 35, 13, 2, 7,
24, 29, 20, 18, 0, 11

 x x x x

 x x

 x


 Lets start with the most common and easy of the sessions.

 Lets say the first spin (the one you do not bet), number 20 hits;
that would have been a winning, so next spin you start betting. Do not
forget to track number 20 (circle it, as this is the second time it
hits).

 Now your selection should look like this:


 19, 1, 31, 21, 34, 8, 22, 25, 33, 16, 26, 28, 12, 9, 35, 13, 2, 7,
24, 29, 20, 18, 0, 11

 x x x x

 x x

 x


 So, now you have placed flat bet in all the above numbers.

 Now lets say number 25 hits. That is a winning, and you are 12 units
up.

 NOW YOU FINISH THAT SESSION.


 There are 3 circumstances under which you MUST FINISH a session :


 a) When you are 12 units up, between 10 spins from the spin you
started to place bets.

 b) If you are not 12 units up between 10 spins, you keep playing
until you are -12 units down. As soon as you are -12 units down you
finish that session. You can do this until spin number 90 (counting
from the first spin you have tracked, NOT from the first spin you have
placed bets). Don't worry too much about this, as this very rarely
happens, if ever. Usually you finish a session before play spin number
20. The longest session I have recorded is 31 spins to finish -12
units; and that have happened once in 750 sessions.

 When I talk about 90 spins, I'm talking about the worst possible
scenario. I think it is almost impossible to happen, since either you
surely will finish the session under circumstance "a" or you will
finish when you are -12 units before 90 spins (circumstance "b"), or
you will finish the session under circumstance "c".

 c) As soon as you are -84 or -96 units down, you finish that session.
Of course it is the less common circumstance.


 ALWAYS REMEMBER: There is a maximum of 10 spins to be 12 units up.
NEVER FORGET THAT.

 After spin number 10, from the time you started to place bets, your
objective is to be -12 units down. Do not try to profit after 10th
spin. If you do that, you are not playing "The Garden" system
properly.


 Lets continue with more examples:


 These are our numbers from the original example:


 19, 1, 31, 21, 34, 8, 22, 25, 33, 16, 26, 28, 12, 9, 35, 13, 2, 7,
24, 29, 20, 18, 0, 11

 x x x x

 x x

 x


 Lets say first spin number 23 hits, that would have been a lost, but
you are not betting first spin, remember?

 What you do now is to add number 23 at the end of the string; but now
you have 25 numbers; so you cross out the first number of the string,
ignore numbers with more than one hit, this is easy to do because
numbers with more than one hit are circled.

 So, you cross out number 19.

 Now your selection should look like this:


 19, 1, 31, 21, 34, 8, 22, 25, 33, 16, 26, 28, 12, 9, 35, 13, 2, 7,
24, 29, 20, 18, 0, 11,

 x x x x

 x x

 x

 23


 Lets say next spin number 27 hits, that would have been a lost, but
you are not placing bets yet, remember?

 So, you add number 27 at the end of the string and cross out number
1.

 Now your selection should look like this:


 19, 1, 31, 21, 34, 8, 22, 25, 33, 16, 26, 28, 12, 9, 35, 13, 2, 7,
24, 29, 20, 18, 0, 11,

 x x x x

 x x

 x


 23, 27


 Lets say next spin number 11 hits, that would have been a winning, so
you can start placing bets next spin.

 So, you circle number 11. Never forget to circle repeaters numbers,
or if they are already circled, don't forget to add them a "x".

 Now your selection should look like this:


 19, 1, 31, 21, 34, 8, 22, 25, 33, 16, 26, 28, 12, 9, 35, 13, 2, 7,
24, 29, 20, 18, 0, 11,

 x x x x

 x x

 x


 23, 27


 Now lets say next spin number 36 hits, that is a losing. Now you are
-24 units down.

 So, you add number 36 at the end of the string and cross out number
21. Remember not to cross out numbers with more than one hit; that is
the reason why you don't cross out number 31 in this example.

 Now your selection should look like this:


 19, 1, 31, 21, 34, 8, 22, 25, 33, 16, 26, 28, 12, 9, 35, 13, 2, 7,
24, 29, 20, 18, 0, 11,

 x x x x

 x x

 x


 23, 27, 36


 Now lets say next spin, number 7 hits, that is a winning. Now you are
-12 units down.

 So, you add a "x" under number 7. Do not cross out any numbers, since
there are not new numbers added to the string.

 Now your selection should look like this:


 19, 1, 31, 21, 34, 8, 22, 25, 33, 16, 26, 28, 12, 9, 35, 13, 2, 7,
24, 29, 20, 18, 0, 11,

 x x x x x

 x x

 x


 23, 27, 36


 Now lets say next spin, number 18 hits, that is a winning. Now you
are even.

 So, you circle number 18. Do not cross out any numbers, since there
are not new numbers added to the string.

 Now your selection should look like this:


 19, 1, 31, 21, 34, 8, 22, 25, 33, 16, 26, 28, 12, 9, 35, 13, 2, 7,
24, 29, 20, 18, 0, 11,

 x x x x x

 x x

 x


 23, 27, 36


 Now lets say next spin number 9 hits, that is a winning. Now you are
12 units up. Therefore you FINISH THIS SESSION.


 So in this example you finished the session under circumstance "a",
and your winnings-losing balance should look like this:

 -24, -12, 0, +12


 Lets see an example of a session finished under circumstance "b":

 -24, -12, 0, -24, -48, -36, -60, -48, -36, -24, (from now on your
objective is -12) -48, -36, -24, -12


 Lets see an example of a session finished under circumstance "c":

 -24, -48, -36, -60, -84


 Lets see another example of a session finished under circumstance
"c":

 -24, -12, 0, -24, -48, -72, -96


 What if you have not more numbers with only one hit to cross out?

 This question is the reason why you need to know how many times every
number have hit.

 If you come across with this situation, you start crossing out
numbers with two hits. Always remember to cross out the oldest number
(the closest one to the beginning of the string).

 If you ever come across with the situation in which you have not more
numbers with two hits, cross out numbers with three hits (this
circumstance is very rare).


 What if a crossed out number hits again?

 When a crossed out number came back, you ADD IT at the end of the
string and CIRCLE IT since it has hit twice. And you CROSS OUT the
oldest number with only 1 hit. You should always have only 24 numbers
in your selection.

 If you come across with a situation in wich a "circled and crossed
out number" came back, you add it at the end of the string and add a
"x" under it, since it has hit three times.


 Example, lets say that in any given moment your selection look like
this:


 19, 1, 31, 21, 34, 8, 22, 25, 33, 16, 26, 28, 12, 9, 35, 13, 2, 7,
24, 29, 20, 18, 0, 11,

 x x x x x x

 x x

 x

 x


 23, 27, 36, 5, 32


 Next spin, number 21 hits. As it is crossed out, you add it at the
end of the string and CIRCLE IT since it has hit twice. And you CROSS
OUT the oldest number with only 1 hit (in this example would be number
33).

 Now your selection should look like this:


 19, 1, 31, 21, 34, 8, 22, 25, 33, 16, 26, 28, 12, 9, 35, 13, 2, 7,
24, 29, 20, 18, 0, 11,

 x x x x x

 x x

 x


 23, 27, 36, 5, 32, 21


 VERY IMPORTANT GUIDELINES:


 Always remember you do not bet in the first spin, you must wait until
what would have been a winning happens, or until what would have been
3 loses in a row happens, whatever comes first.


 Always remember: There is a maximum of 10 spins to be 12 units up.
NEVER FORGET THIS RULE.


 Always remember that ONLY after a losing you add a new number, and
cross out a number.


 Always remember that ONLY after a winning you circle a repeater
number, or add a "x" to a repeater number.


 How many sessions should you play and what value of chips?

 Well, I think the best is to play two sessions a day, 3 or 4 days a
week, with $2 chips.

 At least that is what I do. But it's up to you.

 I suggest you to play as a professional player. What it means? Well,
have discipline, stick to the system instructions and don't be
greedy.


 TESTERS READ THIS:


 What I need from you is:


 Number of winning sessions.

 Number of losing sessions. As you know, there are three kinds of
losing sessions (-12, -84, and -96). I need the number of losing
sessions of all three types.

 Your total winnings-losing balance.

 Also if it is possible, number of winning spins and number of losing
spins.

 Your opinion.

 Of course feel free to e-mail me if you have any questions.

 Any ideas about any progression or regression to improve results,
will be welcome.

GARDEN SYSTEM TEST RESULTS REPORT

 HAND TEST RESULTS

 SPINS: 54,008
 TOTAL SESSIONS: 1,256
 WON SESSIONS: 991 (Every won session is +12)
 LOST SESSIONS (-12): 181
 LOST SESSIONS (-84): 52
 LOST SESSIONS (-96): 32
 TOTAL BALANCE: +2,472


 LONG TERM COMPUTER TEST RESULTS
 TEST 1:
 SPINS: 115,000
 TOTAL SESSIONS: 2,753
 WON SESSIONS (+12): 2,211
 LOST SESSIONS (-12): 341
 LOST SESSIONS (-84): 132
 LOST SESSIONS (-96): 69

 TOTAL BALANCE: +4,728


 TEST 2:
 SPINS: 80,000
 TOTAL SESSIONS: 2,215
 WON SESSIONS (+12): 1,771
 LOST SESSIONS (-12): 291
 LOST SESSIONS (-84): 102
 LOST SESSIONS (-96): 51
 TOTAL BALANCE: +4,296


 TEST 3:
 SPINS: 223,000
 TOTAL SESSIONS: 6,015
 SESSIONS WON (+12): 4,804
 SESSIONS LOST (-12): 804
 SESSIONS LOST (-84): 265
 SESSIONS LOST (-96): 142
 TOTAL BALANCE: + 12,108


 TEST 4:

 SPINS: 325,148
 TOTAL SESSIONS: 8,977
 SESSIONS WON (+12): 6,967
 SESSIONS LOST (-12): 1,459
 SESSIONS LOST (-84): 369
 SESSIONS LOST (-96): 182
 TOTAL BALANCE: + 17,628


 WHAT IT MEANS?

 It means that there are a total of 21,216 sessions.
 Lets say you play 4 sessions a day, 5 days a week; that would be 80
sessions a month, or else 960 sessions a year.